parable trend and history of geographically nation-wide
census taking, irrespective of ethnic coverage, for the pres­
ent territory in retrospect.
Unless otherwise indicated, the data shown in Table 6
relate to the modified present-in-area population within
present boundaries. This type of population and its com­
parability with de jure figures has been discussed in detail
on page 17. When a complete series of de jure census re­
turns was also available, these have been included in the
table for reference.
Horizontal rules have been used to indicate a break in
the comparability of the series. Historically consistent
series can thus be identified by the absence of such rules.
A rule and a space extending through the stub and body
of the table indicate a second time series; a rule extending
through the data columns only indicates a change in the
series due to geographic or other differences.
Coverage: Table 6 contains enumerated population data
for 222 countries and territories. All geographic units
having had censuses of population are included, irrespec.
tive of the ethnic coverage.
Rate computation: Annual average per cent rates of change
are the average geometric rates of increase or decrease be­
tween two successive census returns, computed using the
following formula:
PI = Po (I + r) t X 100
where Po is the population at the beginning of the
period,
PI is the population at the end of the period,
t is the number of years intervening, and
r is the annual rate of change.
Rates were computed between census returns for both
sexes and only for those considered "comparable". Com­
parability, which was assumed to be present lacking evi­
dence to the contrary, was considered to be dependent on
consistency throughout the series as to type of census, i.e.,
de jure or de facto, on a more or less consistent degree of
under- or over-enumeration, and on unchanged area or
the adjustment of population to the present area. Rates
are not calculated for non-indigenous census series, be­
cause population change in these segments is often the
result of extraneous factors not demographic in origin.
Limitations: Because these are enumerated populations,
they are subject to under- or over-enumeration and to
variations in the concept of de jure and de facto through
the years. Wherever it was significant, the factor of under­
or over-enumeration has been pointed out in the tables.
The only available information on the definitions of the
total population is that found in Table A, p. 16. Refer­
ence should be made to this table for information on
popUlation composition at the later censuses. For previous
censuses, no definitive information is available, but it may
be assumed that they followed more or less the same
pattern.
Table 7
A time trend of the population of the capital city and
each city which had 100,000 or more inhabitants accord­
ing to the latest estimate or census is shown in Table 7.
Included are national and city census results from enu­
merations carried out between 1940 and 1961, supple-
men ted by estimates for 1955-1961. The estimates may be
identified by an (E) following the date in the stub.
Since the way in which cities are delimited differs from
country to country, efforts have been made to include in
the table not only data for the so-called city proper but
also those for the urban agglomeration if such exists. The
urban agglomeration has been defined as including the
suburban fringe or thickly settled territory lying outside
of, but adjacent to, the city boundaries. Whenever an
urban-agglomeration figure is available, it has been used
as the basis for applying the 100,000 criterion in order
that every city of the selected size class, however defined,
may be included.
The order of presentation in Table 7 is English alpha­
betical, although the names of cities are given in the lan­
guage of the country to which they pertain or, if required,
in a transliteration of it. These principles of presentation
were adopted because of the difficulty of establishing
English and/or French equivalents for official names of
cities. For purposes of identification, the name of the
capital city is printed in small capital letters.
Coverage: Cities from 194 countries and territories are in­
cluded in Table 7; of these, 123 show the capital city only,
while 71 show the capital and one or more cities which,
according to the latest estimate, had 100,000 or more in­
habitants. In many cases, these cities had less than 100,000
in previous years. According to this table, cities with
population of 100,000 or more currently appear to num­
ber 1,413, but this should not be considered a precise
world total because, as may easily be observed, data have
not been made available for many countries in which
cities of this size may be presumed to exist.
Limitations: City populations are especially affected by the
difficulties of defining the de facto and de jure concepts
in relation to them. Comparability is also impaired by
different methods used in constructing the estimates and
by the lack of precision which may be present even in the
same methods. For example, births and deaths occurring
in the cities do not all originate in the population present
in, or resident of, that area. Therefore, the use of natural
increase to estimate the probable size of the popUlation is
often the source of large errors. Internal migration is a
second estimating component which cannot be measured
with accuracy in many areas. Because of these factors,
data in Table 7 are of limited value for international
comparisons.
Comparability is even more limited by variations in
the national concepts used to define a "city" for admin­
istrative purposes. In most countries, cities are locali­
ties with fixed boundaries and an administratively recog­
nized urban status which is usually characterized by
some form of local government. In others, e.g., Japan,
Ryukyu Islands, France, the "city" in Table 7 is an ad­
ministrative division composed of a popUlated centre and
adjoining territory which may be distinctly rural in
character or may contain other quite separate urban ag­
glomerations. Whenever it was known that the data
referred to the latter type, they have been noted in the
table, but even with these warnings, international com­
parisons must be made with extreme caution.
Finally, it must be mentioned that data in Table 7 may
have been obtained from city censuses (as in Liberia)
from national censuses, from regular estimating proce-
32