dures, or from ad hoc surveys. Their reference dates tend
to be diverse in any case, and inasmuch as city popula­
tions follow all types of growth patterns, comparison be­
tween data for different years should be carried out with
these factors in mind.
Table 8
This table, published for the first time in the Demo­
graphic Yeal'book, shows a time trend of the aggreg~te
population living in localities of 100,000 or more Ill­
habitants and in those of 20,000 or more, the number of
such localities, and the percentage that the aggregate
populations form of the total for the country.
Data from censuses of population carried out between
1920 and 1960 are included, together with such estimates
as were readily available. The latter, identified by an (E)
in parenthesis following the date in the stub, includes
primarily estimates of 100,000-p~us cities, summed f~~m
Table 7; in these cases, informatIOn for 20,000-plus cIties
is generally not available.
A code showing the type of locality to which the data
refer at each date is given on the table and a more spe­
cific description of that for each country is given at the
end of the table. The three categories of the code (a, h
and c) are described as follows:
a-Agglomerations or clusters of population without re­
gard to official boundaries or admi~istrative functi?~s.
b-Localities having fixed boundarIes and an admmls­
tratively recognized town status which is usually c~ar­
acterized by some form of local government, operatmg
under a charter or under terms of incorporation. Such
localities have various designations; among the most fre­
quent are: cities, towns, boroughs, ur?an. distric.ts a~cl
municipalities. Sometimes, they are dlstncts whIch In­
clude a central agglomeration and the surrounding ter­
ritory that is administered from the central place; some­
times, they are separate cities, wholly urban in character,
with city limits which may fall inside the ed?":s of the
agglomeration. The aggregat.e of these localItIes often
comprises the urban population as defined by the par-
ticular country. . .
c-Minor civil divisions (often the smallest admmlstra­
tive divisions) which have fixed boundaries and which
together comprise the entire territory of the given country.
Such units do not necessarily have local government or
town status, though some of them-usually those with large
populations-may do so. Classi~cations of this type are
the most difficult to evaluate wIth respect to theIr con­
formity to agglomerations or clusters. In most. countries,
they conform in a general way so far as ~elatI~ely large
agglomerations are concerned, but medIUm-sIZed and
small clusters are likely to be obscured by the adherence
to fixed territorial units.
It will be noted that localities in this table refer over­
whelmingly to type b-t.hC: loc~lities whic~ have fi.x~d
boundaries and are admmlstratlvely recognIzed as CIties
or towns. These are the city-proper entries in Table 7;
those coded a are the urban-agglomeration data in
Table 7.
Unless otherwise specified, total population figures refer
to the modified present-in-area population within present
territorial boundaries of the countries concerned.
Coverage: Statistics are shown in Table 8 for 149 co~n­
tries and territories; of these, 76 show data for both SIzes
of localities and 28 show only 20,000-plus aggregates. Be­
cause of their geographic nature, the data relate to those
censuses or estimates which were nation-wide in coverage
and which included all persons present in or residing in
the area.
Exclusions from the table include cities such as Berlin,
Ceuta, Melilla, Gibraltar and Monaco where the locality
of 100,000 or more is coextensive with the territory, and
countries for which no total population estimate is avail­
able for computation of percentages. The latter restric­
tion applies only to Ethiopia, the data for which appear
in Table 7.
It will be noted that a number of areas are shown with
zero frequencies; these are not, however, the maximum
number of such areas because they represent only those
which tabulated total popUlation by locality-size groups.
An additional number of countries undoubtedly belong
in this category, at least in respect of 100,000-plus locali­
ties (see Table 7) but these have not been repeated in
Table 8.
Per cent computation: Percentages are the aggregate popula­
tions in each locality-size group per 100 total population
in the country or territory at the same date. Percentages
have been computed to two decimals and rounded to one
for presentation.
Limitations: Census statistics in Table 8 are affected by all
the limitations imposed by differences in definition of
total population and the varying importance of under­
enumeration; these have been discussed on page 17 above.
The estimates are also limited by the qualifications of
popUlation estimates in general, as described on page 19.
More important than either of these, however, are the
limitations introduced by the varying national definitions
of localities on which the table is based. The three cate­
gories of localities have been described above. Some
degree of comparability may be assumed to exist between
data classified as a, b or c but great care must be taken
in comparing data for localities of different types. This
is probably most important in comparing percentages or
trends for localities of type h with those of type c because
of the difficulty of ascertaining the degree of urbanization
in the minor civil division. So long as the type of locality
involved remains unchanged from year to year, the time
changes in the proportion of the population living in
places of 20,000 or more and in places of 100,000 or more
do provide a useful index of urbanization for anyone
area. They also are useful for analysing world and re­
gional trends, since they are relatively free from the com­
plexities introduced by national definitions of urban
status. The data are perhaps most useful when considered
in relation to those from Tables 7 and 9.
Table 9
Table 9 presents a time trend of the number and per
cent of population enumerated or estimated as urban, by
sex, during the period 1920-1960. A limited trend for
1900-1950 was presented in the 1952 Demographic Year­
book and one for censuses taken between 1945 and 1954
in the 1955 Demographic Yearbook. Table 9 brings up to
date these two tables and expands the time coverage con­
siderably.
In general, data shown are from nation-wide censuses
33