day and the data are the unsmoothed tabulation results.
The classification includes 20 categories as follows: under
I year, 1-4,5-9, continuing in 5-year groups to 84, a resid­
ual category of 85 and over and unknown. This is in
accord with the classification recommended by the United
Nations. a1
Unless otherwise noted, data relate to the modified
present-in-area population of geographic areas within
present territorial boundaries, as described on p. 17. If
the modification has involved large numbers of per­
sons, a special note is also appended for clarity even
though the resulting estimate is the standard for the table.
In accordance with the policy adopted in the 1959 Year­
book, estimates believed to be of questionable reliability
are set in italics rather than in roman type. The classifica­
tion of estimates into reliable and less reliable is based
on the method of their construction as described in con­
nexion with total figures in Table 4. No attempt has been
made to take account of age-reporting accuracy, described
on page 18.
Coverage: Table 5 includes one or more age-sex distribu­
tions of population for 208 geographic units, making a
total of 1,085 separate arrays, of which 367 relate to a
census count and 718 to estimates. All geographic units
having tabulations of enumerated population by age and
sex are incluued, regardless of the ethnic coverage of the
census.
Availability was not the sole criterion used in deter­
mining the scope of Table 5; a number of estimated age­
sex distributions were deliberately excluded on the basis
of their construction. To be included in this table, an
estimate must have been constructed by the natural-in­
crease method, supplemented by migration statistics if
available. Distributions which result when the estimated
total population is distributed by age and sex according
to percentages in each age-sex group at the time of the
census are not acceptable. Such distributions are on file
for Bolivia, Brazil, Burma, Ceylon, Chile, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Ecuador, the Egyptian region of the United
Arab Republic, Honduras, Italy, Mexico, Panama, Peru,
St. Kitts·Nevis and Anguilla, Singapore, Thailand and
Venezuela.
Limitations: Comparability of population data classified by
age and sex is limited in the first place by variations in
the definition of total population which has been dis­
cussed in detail on p. 15, and by the accuracy of the
original enumeration, also discussed above. Both of these
factors are more important in relation to certain age
groups than to others. For example, underenumeration
is known to be more prevalent among young children
than at older ages; the composition of the total popula­
tion is primarily a function of the inclusion or exclusion
of certain groups who may be of selected ages, such as
members of the armed forces and so forth. Consideration
should be given to the implications of these basic limita­
tions in using the data.
Further to these general qualifications are the special
problems of comparability which arise in relation to age
statistics in particular. Age distributions of population
are known to suffer from certain deficiencies which have
their origin in underenumeration of infants and in ir-
81 Principles and Recommendations fOT National Population Cen­
IUses, op. cit., para. 503.
regularities in age reporting, a discussion of which is
given on p. 17. Although some of the irregularities in the
age statistics tend to be obscured or eliminated when data
are tabulated in 5-year age groups, precision still con­
tinues to be affected, though the degree of distortion is
not always readily seen. The classification of age distribu­
tions by Whipple's Index given on p. 18 will thus con­
tinue to serve as a guide to the evaluation of age accuracy
in Table 5.
Another limitation on comparability is found in the
basis for the age classification employed by the various
countries. Whenever it was known that the classification
was based on year of birth rather than the standard "age
at last birthday", the data are so noted in the tables and
allowance should be made for this factor in using them.
The effect is described on page 17.
Deviations from the standard age classification of the
table are shown by bracketing and footnotes. Although
precise international comparability of specific age groups
is often lacking,32 the data are nevertheless included be­
cause of their basic value for the area concerned. This is
particularly true for African areas. Since statistics for
Africa have not been generally available until recent
years, the results of sample censuses and others employ­
ing non-conventional methodology are included because
of the scarcity of information for this continent.
In connexion with the age classification, it should be
noted that zero frequency reported in the unknown-age
category is not always an indication of perfect age report­
ing; it is more often an indication that an assumed age
has been assigned before tabulation began. The method
of age allocation is not always known and hence it is
noted infrequently in the tables, but the possibility of
its having occurred should not be overlooked.
As noted in connexion with Table 4, intercensal esti­
mates of total population are usually revised, if required,
to accord with the results of a census of population. Age­
sex distributions, however, are not always revised in this
way; those which have not been revised are marked provi­
sional in this table. These should be used with caution in
analyzing time trends though their utility for studying
age structure for that year is probably unimpaired.
Table 6
This table is designed to show the date of each true
census of population taken between 1900 and 1961 in
each country and territory of the world, the male and
female population in each, and the average annual per
cent rates of population growth for both sexes combined,
calculated over the intercensal periods. Available male
and female frequencies are shown even though their sum
differs from the final total population of the area.
An historical series of intercensal rates of population
growth was last shown in the 1955 Demographic Year­
book but that presentation differed from this one in that
it showed only population for both sexes combined rather
than male and female separately, and it included area
figures as well as population. In Table 6, area is assumed
to be present area, i.e., that shown in Table I, and to
remain unchanged retrospectively unless otherwise indi­
cated. The objective of Table 6 is thus to show a com-
32 There are at least 58 varieties of nonstandard age classes in
table 5.
31