tistics and, as such, must be considered in using popula enumerated or adjusted, and to give the correction
tion data from different countries. factor.7
1\1odified de facto (international conventional total) Age distribution
In an effort to increase international comparability of Age- the characteristic most universally investigated
the results of population censuses to be taken around both in population and vital statistics- is commonly de
1950 and provide better information for constructing terminedonthebasisoftwo typesofquestions,usedsingly
world and regional aggregates, the Population Commis or in combination. The first type asks for date of birth;
sion recommended a "modified de facto" tabulation.3 the alternative methodrequires age in completedunits of
This same concept has been included in the Principles time, that is, age at last birthday-in years for adults and
and Recommendations for National Population Gen in months, weeks, ordays for infants. These two methods
suses,4 designed to provide guidance for the taking of the do not necessarily result in data ofequal accuracy. There
1960 cycle of censuses. In these recommendations, the is evidence that the date-of-birth type of inquiry yields
new total is called the "international conventional total", more precise data than the direct question, but it is ob
and it is defined as "the total number of persons present viously of limited applicability in areas where a large
in the country at the time of the census, excluding for proportion of the population is illiterate or unable, for
eign military, naval and diplomatic personnel and their other reasons, to give the exact date of birth. On the
families located in the country but including military, other hand, the direct question on age also may be
naval and diplomatic personnel of the country and their answered incorrectly, either through ignorance or delib
families located abroad and merchant seamen resident in erate misstatement.
the country but at sea at the time of the census". An additional source ofvariation may be found in the
In accordance with these recommendations, the popu method of classifying the data after they are collected.
lation figures shown in thisDemographic Yearbook-both The recommended method is to convert the date-of-birth
censuses and estimates-are, in sofar as possible, modified information to age at last birthday by subtracting the
present-in-area counts or, in new terminology, interna exact date of birth from the date of the census. This
tional conventional totals. This means that (if appli age, which will be in the largest units of completed
cable) they include data for jungle tribes, aborigines, time, i.e., years, months, weeks, days, would then be
nomadicpeoples, displaced personsand refugees, together classified into the age groups selected, or by single years
with national armed forces and diplomatic personnel and if desired. This method of completed years is not al
theirdependants stationed outside the territory, and they ways used, however. Some countries omit the conversion
exclude alien armed forces, alien diplomatic personnel, step and classify popUlation not by age, but by the
their dependants and enemy prisoners of war stationed original year of birth. In such a classification, all chil
inside the country.5
dren born in the year immediately prior to the census
year would be counted as one year of age eveR though, if
Accuracy of censuses
they were born 30 November and the census were taken 1
Total population .January of the succeeding year, they had completed only
Irrespectiveof whether the census is de facto or de jure one monthoflife. Evidence of this type of classification is
in concept, the obtaining of a complete yet unduplicated seen in the distributions where the under-one-year cate
count of the population of any area presents numerous gory appears smaller than it should be in relation to
problems. These problems are, of course, more pro the succeeding categories. It should be noted, however,
nounced in areas where the inhabitants are unfamiliar that for a year during which a large number of births
with census-taking, but it should be emphasized that they took place, the effectmay not beso clear.A good example
are present in every enumeration.6 may be seen in the single-year-of-age data for Norway
Measuring the amount of underenumeration by post 1946, published in the 1955 Yearbook. These data, which
censal field check or other means makes it possible to were classified by year of birth, show an under-I-year
correct the total, but it is usually impossible to revise the frequency of 69,133 persons, while the l-year-of-age cate
distributions,except perhapsthegeographicclassification. gory has only 6:2,464. This is apparently the result of
Hence, the principal use of such measures is to point up the fact that the birth rate reached its post-war peak in
the lack of completeness inherent in even the most care Norway in 1946, thus inflating the under-I-year category.
fully planned and executed census and to stimulate pre Misstatements arise from numerous factors, among
cision. To avoid misinterpretation in the various tables which may be cited ignorance of correct age; carelessness
of the Yearbook, care has been taken to describe the in reporting and recording; a general tendency to state
populations, in so far as this is possible, as actually age in figures ending in certain digits, such as zero, two,
five and eight, and of older persons to exaggerate age; a
possibly subconscious aversion to certain numbers such
3Report of the Population Commission (fourth session), docu
mentE/l!!I!!,pp.16,17. as 13; and wilful misrepresentations arising from motives
'United Nations. Statistical Office. Principles and Recommenda of an economic, social, political or purely individual
tions for National Population Censuses. Document ST/STAT/
character. The above-cited reasons for misstatements are
SER.M/27,1958,para.40!!. (Sales No.58'xVII.5)
•For a more detailed discussion of de jure and de facto concepts common to most investigations of age and to most coun
and the implications of these concepts in connexion with enumera tries and they may impair comparability to a marked
tions,see: Handbook of Population Census Methods. Op. cit. Vol. I,
General Aspects of a Population Census, pp. 91-92; Vol. III, Demo degree.
graphic and Social Characteristics of the Population, pp. 55-59. Another source of non-comparability not universal in
•For further discussion, see 1956 Demographic Yearbook, Chapter
I, pp. 9-11. Also, Handbook of Population Census Methods, Vol. I,
op. cit., pp. 104-111. 7For nationalestimates,seeTable I.p.99.
17