series were considerably less reliable than the code im specifiedyear, rather than to eventswhich were registered
plies. But, since it was felt that a more obvious means during the period. This is in accord with the United
was desirable for identifying data whose reliability was Nation's Principle20 on this subject.
questionable and since the effect is to overstate rather Symbol: Reference to the tables will reveal, however,
than understate reliability, the current code has been that despite this international recommendation, a con
used as a basis of classification-despite its deficiencies. siderable number of countries tabulate their statistics not
Likewise, it has seemed justifiable to assume that data for by date of occurrence but by date of registration; more
which the degree of completeness was still unknown over, very few of these have analysed the results with a
might be considered as unreliable and set in italics, to view to proving their adequacy as measures of natality or
gether with those codedU. mortality. Because such statistics can be very misleading,
Strictly speaking, the reliability code relates specifically the countries known to tabulate vital statistics by date of
to the vital-statistics frequencies and, therefore, only registration are identified in the tables by a dagger
indirectly to rates which depend also on population symbol (t). The absence of the dagger, therefore, indi
figures. However, it should be pointed out that the two cates date-of-occurrence tabulation but, since complete
components of the rate are not unrelated particularly information is not available, this assumption may over
where vital statistics have been utilized in the prepara state the occurrencegroup tosomeextent.
tion of the population estimates. Therefore, rates based Effect on comparability: If registration is prompt, the
on unreliable statistics are shown as unreliable even difference between statistics tabulatedby the two methods
though their magnitude may appear credible for one might be negligible. The only factor limiting compara
reason or another. A fuller evaluation of current rates bility in such cases is the length of the statutory time
may be made by considering also the implications of the period allowed for current registration which, inciden
evaluation of population estimates presented in Table I tally,differs markedly from country to country.
and elsewhere. However, if delayed registration exists to any substan
tial degree, vital statistics by date of registration will not
produce internationally comparable data. Under the best
Tabulation Procedures
circumstances, statistics of registrations will include
Present-in-area population
primarily events which occurred in the immediately
In accordance with part (c) of Principle 409,18 vital preceding year; in countries with less well-developed sys
statistics shown in this Yearbook relate to the de facto or tems, they will include many of longer durations. Exami
present-in-area population. Thus, unless otherwise noted, nation of evidence available for the United States, Costa
vital statistics include events which occurred within the Rica, Chile and the Dominican Republic reveals that
present boundaries of the geographic areas shown and delays of up to 20-25 years are not uncommon for birth
among all segments of population therein. Footnotes are registration, though the majority are recorded between
used only to show deviations from this concept, except in 2 and 4 years of birth. As registration completeness and
the case ofdeaths among the armed forces; for clarity, the promptness improve, date-of.registration tabulations will
disposition of these deaths is explained in so far as pos approximate more closely the true frequencies for the
sible, irrespective of whether it constitutes a deviation year in question but, until this time is reached, the sta
from thestandardconcept. tistics of registration will not be internationally com
The need for distinguishing for national purposes be parable.
tween statistics for areas or peoples where registration is It should also be mentioned that lack of international
moderately complete and those in which it is incomplete comparability is not the only problem introduced by
has been recognized in Principles 402 and 403.19 In line date-of-registration tabulation. Even within the same
with these Principles, statistics for some countries regu country, comparability over time may be lost by the
ularly exclude data for a segment of the population in practice. If the number of events registered from year to
which registration, though compulsory, is not even mod year fluctuates to any extent (due to ad hoc incentives to
eratelycomplete, and for which therefore the statistics are stimulate registration or to the sudden need for proof of
very unreliable. Countrieswhich follow this procedure in birth or death to meet certain requirements), vital sta
clude Panama and Venezuela, where vital statistics ex tistics tabulated by date of registration cannot provide a
clude data for the tribal Indian population; Peru, whose measureof the level of natality ormortality; nor can they
jungle population is excluded; British Guiana, Surinam, provide an indication of the trend. All they can give is
Syria and Australia, where statistics for nomadic aborigi an indication of the fluctuations in the need for a birth,
nes are not included. These cases, as well as others where death or marriage certificate. If, on the other hand, regis
thegeographicarea orpopulation covered by thestatistics tration completeness is not sporadic but steady from year
is less than the entire country, are noted in the tables. to year, and-in fact-improving, the apparent rise in the
birth and death rates may be mistaken for evidence of
By date of occurrence versus date of registration
changes in the incidence of births and deaths. In both
In so far as possible, the vital statistics presented in the cases, statistics of birth and death registrations are of very
Yearbook refer to events which occurred during the limited use for either national or international studies.
18"Tabulation of data for the national territory should relate in Statistical definition of events
general to data on events occurring within the national boundaries,
although under certain circumstances, as for example during war Another source of variation-though a much less im
years, provision may need to be made for including in the national portant one-lies in the statistical definition of vital
tabulations data for deaths among the armed forces stationed out·
side the national boundaries."
19 Principlestora VitalStatisticsSystem,op.cit.,p. 17. 2Q Ibid., p. 18.
24