odicity of previous censuses. The adjustment is likely to were complete or that the territory involved was a small
be more dependable where censuses have been taken island in which it was presumed the chance of error was
within intervals not exceeding ten years than where this small. In addition, a very few (5) estimates based on a
has not been the case. current count which was not a population census or
I: The symbol I is used where the current estimate survey were considered "good" since they related to small
has been preceded by at least two censuses within populations.
decennial intervals. Censuses intended to be decen The exercise described above classifies series according
nial are occasionally delayed by a year or two, and to the reliability of the most recent estimate-that is, the
allowance is made in the code for this possibility, estimate for 1959 or 1958. On the assumption that this
wherepertinent. evaluation covered the years immediately prior to 1958
2: The symbol 2is used where there have been two or or 1959, it might be assumed that an evaluation was thus
availableforroughly 1955-1959.
more previous censuses but more than ten years
To ascertain whether the evaluation for these past 5
have elapsed either between the dates of the last
years was in accord with that for an earlier part of the
two censuses or between the last census and the
series, recourse was made to the evaluation for 1949-1951
currentdate.
estimates, published in the 1952 Demographic Yearbook.
3: The symbol 3 is used where only one or no census
According to the text of that issue (page 21), combina
has been taken. In this instance, it can be presumed
tions of R, A and B, with 0, 1or 2of the code then used
that the assumptionofa rate of population increase
indicated estimates ofa relatively high level of reliability.
rests on rather uncertain evidence. Base data se
Analysis of the current estimates considered "good" in
cured by methods other than those of a census
termsof the 1952code showed that the current evaluation
ordinarily lack the comparability needed for cal
overstated to some extent the number ofgood series. This
culation ofareliablerate ofincrease.
means that theseriesare not homogeneous and in a num
ber of cases, some evaluated as now "good" were "poor"
Evaluation of time series
as late as 1952.13 It may be noted, however, that those
The code described above has been designed primarily now coded as less reliable were also considered unreliable
to evaluate thepresumablereliability ofestimates of total in 1952. It is evident, therefore, that the reliable series
population for a current date (mid-year 1959, in this are of varying degrees of reliability, that their number
instance); it appears in Table I only. However, since errson thesideofoverstatementand that in earlieryears,
there is usually a certain consistency in the manner in many were considerably less reliable than the classifica
which countries prepare their population estimates from tion implies.
year to year, the code has some relevance also to the esti The application of all these factors resulted in the
matesfor otherrecentyears. In the caseofa time seriesof distinction of estimates of questionable reliability from
population estimates, however, not only is the reliability others. This distinction is made evident in Tables 4 and
of a particular estimate a matter of interest, but the 5 by the use of italic type for those of questionable reli
accuracy with which annual population changes are re ability, as indicated by their method of construction.
flected is also relevant. Hence, in a statistical appraisal This categorizing does not in any way evaluate the ac
of time series, more attention needs to be given to the curacy of the information on characteristics such as age;
method of time adjustment and to its qualifications. such efforts as have been made in this direction are set
As a first step, the estimates presented in Table 4 were forth on page 18.
classified according to whether the latest estimate was It must be emphasized that this classification is, in a
based on a complete census of population (A), on a real sense, experimental; it is hoped that with experience
sample census (B), on a partial or limited-coverage and information gained in the interim, the distinction
census (C) or on a conjecture (D). Those having their may be sharpened and refined in the succeeding issues of
origin in a census of population, irrespective of whether the Demographic Yearbook. The limitations of printing
it was 100 per cent or a sample enumeration, were con for visualindicationsof this kind must be borne in mind,
sidered more reliable than those based on the results of however, and also the desirability in any case of keeping
a partial censusoron a conjecture. the number of evaluation categories to a minimum so
Estimates based on a census were next classified by the that their meaning may be immediately grasped by
method of time adjustment. Good time adjustment com the user.
prisedupdatingbya populationregisterorthe balancing
IIIThese are Albania, American Samoa, Argentina, Bahamas, Brit
equation method (codes a and h), provided the com ish Guiana, Bulgaria, Cayman, Chile, China (Taiwan), Christmas
ponents of the adjusting factor were adequately ac Island, Cocos (Keeling) Islands, Cook Islands, Costa Rica, Gibraltar,
Greenland, Guatemala, Hungary, Jamaica, Malta and Gozo, Mauri
counted for. Adequate accounting was limited to hi'S tius, Nauru, Niue, Norfolk Island, St. Helena, West Berlin, Western
and those h 's where it was known that vital statistics Samoa,Singapore,andTonga.
2
VITAL STATISTICS
For purposes of the Demographic Yearbook, vital sta Statistics System14 which defines the field of vital statistics
tistics have been defined as statistics of live birth, death,
1<United Nations. Statistical Office. Principles for a Vital Statis
foetal death, marriage and divorce. Thisis in accord with tics System; Recommendations for the Improvement and Standard
ization of Vital Statistics. Document ST/STAT/SER.M/19, 26 Au
Principle 201 ofthe United Nations Principles for a Vital gust 1953, p. 6. (Sales No. 53.xVII.8)
22