Component parts of territories, such as parts of federa of natural and migratory increase.28 Moreover, for small
tions orislandgroups, are shown when data are available populations an error up to -+- 0.5 may be introduced by
separately. Where it is not feasible or convenient to show chance alone. The 6-year period is also of short duration
data for each component, footnotes explain the geo for long-range conclusions. Nevertheless, beingable to be
graphiccompositionofthe territory. calculated for every area, these rates do provide a useful
index which-with proper cautions-can be useful also
Rate computation: inevaluatingtheaccuracyofvitalandmigrationstatistics.
Comparability of area figures is limited by all factors
Rate of increase: The average annual per cent rate
set forth on p. 15 above. It should be emphasized that
of change in population size between 1953 and 1959 has
density values are very rough indices, inasmuch as they
been computed from data in the table, using the follow
do not take account of the dispersion or concentration of
ingformula:
population withinareas.
+
P 1 = Po (1 r) t X 100
Table 2
where Pois thepopulationin 1953,
This table presents comparable estimates of world
P is thepopulationin 1959,
1 population by continental divisions and regions for each
t is6 (yearsbetween 1953and 1959),and
tenth year, 1920 to 1950, and for 1959, together with the
ris theannualrate ofchange.
average annual per cent rate of population increase be
Although population estimates in Table 1 appear only tween 1950 and 1959, estimatedbirth and death rates for
in thousands, figures in unit digits were used whenever the period 1955-59, the 1959 area in square kilometres
possible for the computation ofrates. In some cases, how and the population density for that year.
ever, the only estimates available were those rounded to The population estimates in this table were based on
the nearest thousand, hundred thousand ormillion; when official figures shown in Table 1, but they include in
the number of significant digits was so few as to cause addition an adjustment for under- or over-enumeration
the possible error of the computation to reach -+- 0.5, at the various censuses and for over-estimation, an allow
the resultant rate is so footnoted. Rates were computed ance for categories of population not regularly included
to two decimals and rounded to one for publication. in the official figures and an estimate for those countries
No rates were computed for populations of less than which have notyet providedofficial 1959data. Because of
50,000 because chance variation alone would in these these adjustments, regional and continental sub-totals do
cases amount to atleast 0.5 per cent. A footnote identifies not necessarily coincide with those which would result
these in the column. Likewise, no rate was computed from summing the component parts in Table 1. More
where the 1953 and 1959 estimates in thousands are over, estimates for other years might have been recon
identical even though the figures in units might differ structed to take account of newly acquired current infor
slightly. In these cases, a symbol of one dot (.) was used mation, resulting in data which differ from those shown
to signify that a rate was not applicable under the cir in previous issues of the Yearbook. Hence, the regional
·cumstances. and world estimates in the latest version of Table 2 are
considered to supersede all previouslypublishedfiguresof
Density: Unless otherwise indicated, density is the this type. Because of rounding, the regional and world
number of persons in the 1959 total population per totals are not in all cases the sum of their parts.
square kilometre of total area. This index has been com Per cent rates of increase have been calculated by the
puted for every geographic unit for which the two com method explained in connexion with Table 1, except
ponents were available. Where two area figures are given that the time period (t) here relates to the period 1950
-forexample, one for administrative boundaries and one 1959, rather than to 1953-1959.
for habitable land-the habitable area is the base for the Theestimated average annual birth and deathratesfor
,densitycomputation. the 5-year period 1955-59 have been derived from a study
of the range ofrecorded rates ineach country or territory
!Limitations: The population data given in this table are
in the region and such official estimates of natality and
subject to the limitations of population statistics in gen
mortalityas may havebeenobtainedfrom samplesurveys,
.eral, namely variations in definitions and tabulation
analyses of consecutive census returns and the like. The
methods, deficiencies in completeness of the basic count
method involves rank-ordering the registered or esti
and differences in the methodofconstructing estimates
matedbirthrates and death ratesobservedineachregion;
all of which were discussed above on p. 15. To assist in
subtracting the observed population rate of growth for
the assessing of comparability, the degree of underenum
the region from the lowest and the highest birth rate
.eration in the population census has been given when
in the range and adding it to the lowest and highest
known, and the reliability of the estimates may be ascer
death rate in the range, to produce two other possible
tained by reference to the type-of-estimate code and to
birth and death rates consistent with the components;
the type-face in which the figures are set. For guidance
arranging the four potential birth and death rates in
in interpreting the terms de facto and de jure in relation
rank order, and by a process of averaging, arrive at one
to data in this table, reference may be made to Table A,
birth rate and one death rate which together most nearly
p.16.
and reasonably approximate the observed regional popu
Per cent rates of population growth are subject to all
lation growth rate. Continental rates are weighted
the qualifications of the basic population figures men
averages of regional rates. '"Vide discrepancies between
tioned above. In many cases, they admittedly reflect
the population growth rate and the natural increase rate
simply the rate calculated or assumed in constructing the
.estimates themselves in the absence ofadequate measures "See 1956 Demographic Yearbook, p. 13.
27