Part III. Method of time adjustment (lower scribed in categoriesA and B. This category includes
case letter) estimates based on censuses covering less than 50
a Adjustment by continuous popula per cent of the population or on those conducted
tion register. over an extended period of time (more than 12
months); estimates based on counts of selected
h Adjustment based on calculated bal
groups of individuals, such as those enumerated in
ance of births, deaths and migration.
agricultural, school or other censuses, and those
c Adjustment by assumed rate of in
entered on special registers as, for example, tax
crease.
registers, voters' registers or rationing registers.
d No adjustment; base figure held con
Estimates made from counts of dwellings (such as
stant at least two consecutive years.
huts or tents) which did not list the inhabitants
x Adjustment derived trom regional separately, are considered to fall in this category,
population estimates. as are aggregations of local administrative reports
00 Method of adjustment not deter on persons living in an area. In these estimates, the
mined. error in the total population figure is compounded
of errors in the partial count or counts and errors
in the coefficients or other adjustment factors used
Part IV. Quality of adjustment for types a and
in arriving at a total. It can be presumed that the
h (numeral following letter a or h)
result is usually less accurate than that of a census
I Population balance adequately ac
or systematic sample survey of population.
counted for.
D: The letter D applies where a population figure
2 Adequacy of accounting for popUla
is arrived at by procedures other than those set
tion balance not determined.
forth in A-C above. Such procedures include the
3 Population balance not adequately
conversion of inhabited land area or the returns
accounted for.
of the salt tax to population by application of a
Quality of adjustment for type c (nu coefficient assumed to represent the ratio of popula
meral following letter c) tion to the units of measurement. Estimates of this
type are subject to wide margins of possible error.
I Twoor more censuses taken at decen
nial intervals or less.
Unknown: Two dots (00) are used where the nature
2 Two or more censuses taken, but
of the base data has not been ascertained. In these
latest interval exceeds a decennium.
cases, no attempt is made to classify the other ele
3 One or no census taken.
ments of the code, except when it refers to an unof
ficial estimate, the time adjustment of which was
Part I, represented by capital letters, A, B, C, D or derived from regional estimates (x).
two dots (00)' indicates the nature of the base data from
which the current estimate has beenderived.
Part II of the code consists of a numerical SUbscript
A: The letter A applies when the original census indicating the number of years which have elapsed since
of individuals was performed in a manner designed base data were lastsecured. Thus, if a censuswas taken at
to secure separately data for each individual in the any time in the year 1950, the nearest number of years to
area.n Whether performedthrough self-enumeration mid-year 1959-the date of current estimates presented in
(householder method) or the canvassermethod, such this issue-is nine, and the fact is indicated by the nu
enumerations are regarded as censuses proper; a meral 9 in subscript position following the capital letter
registration of persons reporting at some central of the code. Use of the numeral 0 has been extended
place can have the same effect, as can a house-listing to indicate not only base data obtained in 1959, but
or a census of housing when it secures separate in also those secured in 1960 if the 1959 estimate has been
formation on each individual. For the present pur revised accordingly or been found in no need of revision.
pose, category A is limited to base figures of which It is obvious that the more time that has passed since the
at least 50 per cent were gathered by these means. population was last measured, the more the error likely
to have accumulated in the current estimate owing to
B: The symbol B applies when the base figure was
imperfections in the method of time adjustment.
an estimate based on a sample census or survey,
the sampling units having been selected in such
fashion as to be representative of the majority (over Part III of the code, symbolized by lower-case roman
50 per cent) of the population of the area. The ac letters, refers to the method of carrying a base figure for
curacy of population totals established on the basis ward to the current date. Letters a, h, c, and d classify
of sample surveys varies considerably but can, under official estimates for which the method of time adjust
certain conditions, approximate that of the 100 per ment is known; the letter x qualifies unofficial estimates
cent enumeration. made by the United Nations. When the method of time
adjustment has not been ascertained, two dots (00) are
C: The code C applies when the base figure has
shown.
been secured under conditions other than those de-
a: The letter a indicates that the current estimate
has been obtained directly from a continuous popu
11See Handbook of Population Census Methods, Vol. I, op. cit.,
p.4. lation register, i.e., from a complete register of in-
20