events. It is important, for example, to establish a uni briefly in connexion with the tables; for further details,
form and definite criterion differentiating statistically see the 1957 Demographic Yearbook, in which the fea
between foetal deaths and live births. This has special turesubjectwas mortalitystatistics.
bearing on the comparability of live-birth, total death,
infant-death and foetal-death statistics, an evaluation of MARRIAGE STATISTICS
which may be found in the Handbook of Vital Statistics
The trend of marriages and their distribution by age
Methods, Chapter IV. Internationally recommended defi
of bride and groom constitute the coverage in this issue.
nitions may also be found in the Handbook.
In accordance with the recommendation made in the
Lack. of comparability due to different statistical
Principles for a Vital Statistics System,24 the statistics
definitions is found also in statistics of marriage and
refer, unless otherwise noted, to formal, legal marriages.
divorce. Even though marriage and divorce are legal
The effects of variations in definition, as well as other
rather than biological events and thus presumably less
sources of non-comparability, are discussed briefly in
subject to variation in definition, conceptual differences
connexion with Tables 20 and 21; for a more detailed
between countries do affect the statistics. Further details
treatment of these factors, see pp. 17-18 of the 1958
have been given in the 1958 Demographic Yearbook,
Demographic Yearbook, where this subject was featured.
which featured marriage and divorce statistics.
DIVORCE STATISTICS
LIVE BIRTH STATISTICS
Time series of statistics on dissolution of marriage by
Because this issue of the Yearbook is devoted chiefly
divorce have been set forth in Table 22. Unless otherwise
to population trends, the subject coverage for birth sta
specified, the definition used in compiling these statistics
tistics has been restricted to basic data for which con
was that recommended in the Principles for a Vital Sta
tinuity is required each year, namely, to time trends and tisticsSystem.:l5
births by age of mother. These will be found in Tables
The effects of variations in definition, as well as other
13 and 14,respectively. sources of non-comparability, are discussed briefly in
Forpurposes ofthese tables, live birth hasbeendefined connexion with Table 22; for a more detailed treatment
in accordance with the international definition set forth
of these factors, see pp. 18-19 of the 1958 Demographic
in the Principles for a Vital Statistics System21 and in the Yearbook, where this subject was featured.
1959 Demographic Yearbook. The variations in the data
are discussed briefly in connexion with Tables 13 and 14;
LIFE TABLES
for general limitations of birth statistics, see the 1959
issue of the Demographic Yearbook, where natality sta Life tables are based on observed mortality conditions
tistics were featured. for a selected time period, but they permit a more de
tailed analysis of the implications and prospects inherent
in those conditions than do conventional central death
FOETAL DEATH STATISTICS
rates.
Statistics of late foetal deaths are set forth in one table Though first developed for actuarial purposes, the life
only in this issue, namely, Table 17, which shows the table has many applications in the demographic field.
trend of frequencies and ratios since 1950. Among these are (1) preparation of popUlation projec
The definition of foetal death on which the statistics tions by age and sex, (2) analysis of effects of mortality
are based is that recommended in the Principles for a on the age and sex compositionofa population, (3) com
Vital Statistics System22 and in the 1959 Demographic parisons of summarizing measures of mortality, as the
life-table death rate (the reciprocal of the expectation of
Yearbook which featured natality statistics. The effects
life at birth), expectation of life at various ages, etc.,
of variations in the definition, as well as other sources of
non-comparability, are discussed briefly in connexion (4) computation of net reproduction rates and (5) ap
praisal of the accuracy of census enumerations and vital
with Table 17; for further details, see the 1959 Demo
registration data. In addition, life-table techniques have
graphic Yearbook.
been applied to the analysis of other types of demo
graphic data, for example, in the computation of proba
DEATH STATISTICS
bilities of marriage specific for age and sex, on the basis
Data on mortality (exclusive of foetal death) are pre of census data classified by marital status.
sented in Tables 15, 16, 18 and 19. The trends of total Three principal functions are normally given: (1) the
deaths and infantdeaths, with corresponding crude rates, probabilityof dying within one yearorwithin a specified
are set forth in Tables 15 and 16. Deaths by age and sex age interval for persons of exact ages specified (q",); (2)
and deaths by cause are made available in Tables 18 and the survivors at the beginning of each age interval out of
19. a generation of 100,000 (l1J); and (3) the mean expecta
The definition of "death" on which statistics are based tion of life or the average future lifetime for persons at
is that recommended in the Principles for a Vital Sta exact ages specified (elJ)' In this issue, only the last is in
tistics System.23 The effect of variations in definition, as cluded. For a discussion of this and other values and of
well as other sources of non-comparability, is discussed life-table construction in general, see the 1957 Demo
graphic Yearbook, pp. 40-41.
11Ibid.,Principle202.
..Ibid.,Principle202. ..Ibid., Principle202.
23Ibid., Principle202. 25Ibid., Principle202.
25