Limitations: Since most of the rates and all of the life ex year refers also to estimates for perhaps the last 5 years;
pectancies are presented also in other tables in this or that the code qualifying estimates for 1949-1951, shown
previous Yearbooks, reference should be made to the in the 1952 Demographic Yearbook, applies equally to
corresponding basic compilation and to the Handbook estimates back to 1945 and that series classed as reliable
of Vital Statistics Methodsao for details of limitations and according to these two codes must also have been rela
qualifications. tively reliable in the intervening and earlier years. Thus,
In assessing comparability, special attention should be these assumptions have the effect of classing the earlier
paid to the relative degrees of completeness as expressed estimates in the series as better than they might have
in the quality code in each trend table and the footnotes been and overstating reliability between 1920 and 1950.
appended thereto, and to the basis for the estimatedrates. But since the criteria for current reliability is rather
Variation in the basis of tabulation (i.e., date of occur stringent, andsince there werefew caseswhere the evalua
rence versus date of registration) is another potential tion of 1949-1951 estimates was "poor" while that for
source of noncomparability which should be borne in 1959 and proximate years was "good", the errors of
mind in using the rates on an international basis. Finally, classification probably tend to be minor. For further
the noncorrespondence of the time reference might also details on the method, see page 19.
need to beconsidered in comparingthe various rates with
each otherand with those for othercountries. Coverage: This table, containing data for 224 geographic
areas, is one of the most comprehensive published in the
Yearbook. Major countries are includedevenif the recent
Table 4
span of years for which estimates are available is short;
Estimates of total population for each year 1920-1960 smaller areas are excluded unless the period of years is
are presented in Table 4. All figures are given in thou relativelyextensive.
sands, thosereported in units having been rounded in the The policy ofTable 4 is to show total population in so
Statistical Office, using the digit five (5) in the hundreds far as possible, rather than thatfor sub-national segments.
place as the criterion for upward adjustment.
Unless otherwise indicated, all estimates relate to the Limitations: Comparability of popUlation estimates is lim
modified present-in-area popUlation within present geo ited by the factors set forth on p. 15, namely by the vari
graphic boundaries. This type of popUlation, and its ation in the meaning attached to the terms de jure and
comparability with the de jure estimates, has been dis de facto in defining the total count, by the accuracy of
cussed in detail on p. 17 and in the 1955 and 1956 Demo the census on which estimates are based and by the
graphic Yearbooks. In Table 4, major differences which method of estimate construction.
exist between the population shown and the standard Intercensal estimates are usually reviewed when the
modified de facto have been indicated in footnotes. Also, results of a new census become available. However, this
for emphasis and clarity-especially during war years is not invariablydone, with the resultthat in a numberof
the disposition of certain major segments of population cases, a marked break appears in the series between the
such as armed forces has been indicated in Table 4, even unrevised pre-censal estimate and the census result. In
though this disposition does not constitute disagreement addition, since many of the results of the 1960 census
with thestandard. programme are still provisional, the estimates for the
Estimates relate to the mid-point (1 July) of the speci preceding period have not yet been brought into accord
fied calendar year. In cases where official estimates were with them. Insome ofthese series, the need for revision is
available for 31 December only, the arithmetic mean of obvious; inothers, onlyminordiscontinuitiesare evident.
two consecutive end-of-year estimates was computed and Series which show a marked irregularity of this type are
presented in this table as the midyear estimate. In a few distinguished with a section mark (§) in the stub and a
cases, official estimatesregularly prepared for a date other vertical bar (I) at the break in continuity; these symbols
than I Julyor31 December are given in the table, accom together with the use of italic type referred to above,
panied by a note indicating the date to which they refer. should give an adequate indication of the less-reliable
Census returns have been used when an estimate for series.
the yearinquestion was not available. Foryearsin which
the results of a current enumeration as well as an esti
Table 5
mate were available, the census figure has been shown in
place of the midyear estimate if the two figures appeared Table 5 shows a trend of popUlation classified by age
not to be in sufficient agreement. Whenever a census and sex for 1940-1960. Data included are primarily the
return appears in this table, it is shown in boldface type results of population censuses and intercensal and post
for easy identification. censal estimates constructed by the natural increase
For consistency with Table I, a United Nations esti method. In the absence of midyear estimates, a mean of
mate has been used for 1959 whenever an official figure two acceptable end-year estimates has been substituted,
was lacking. and ifonly one end-yearestimate is available, it is shown.
Series believed to be of questionable reliability are set The reference date of the census or estimate appears in
in italics rather than in roman type. No attempt was thestubofthe tableand theresultsofcensusesarefurther
made to evaluate separately each estimate in the series. identified by a (C) following the date. Means, as de
Rather, the classification of other than current estimates scribed above, are not separately identified except in the
into reliableandofquestionable reliabilityisbasedon an case where the calculated mean differs from a true mid
assumption that the type-of-estimate code for the latest year estimate shown in Table 4.
The age classification shown for censuses and estimates
lOOp.cit. is based, unless otherwise indicated, on age at last birth-
30