EUROPE (continued) 1955-59 should not be considered comparable with those
Northern and Western CentralEurope(cont.) previously derived, nor should the set be considered a
time series. Each series is based on the data available at
Europe (continued) Switzerland
the time of estimation, and much new information has
Monaco West Berlin
Netherlands been taken into account in constructing the estimates for
1955-59.
Norway Southern Europe
Svalbard and Jan Albania
Table 3
Mayen Islands Andorra
Sweden Bulgaria This table, which was first shown in the 1958 Demo
United Kingdom Gibraltar graphic Yearbook, isan attempt to bring together current
Central Europe Greece rates of birth, death, marriage, divorce, infant mortality,
Austria Holy See fertility and natural increase, and expectation-of-life
Czechoslovakia Italy valuesfor countries andterritories where birth and death
East Berlin Malta and Gozo rates are considered reliable.
Eastern.Germany Portugal Recorded rates for the latest available year are shown
Federal Republic of Romania and, where these have been evaluated in terms of com
Germany San Marino pleteness of registration, the additional measures are
Hungary Spain given in footnotes. Where recorded statistics are unreli
Liechtenstein TurkeyinEurope able but a relatively accurate national estimate of the
Poland Yugoslavia birth and death rate has been made, these have been in
cluded-suitably identified. The effects of this policy are
evident particularly in Africa and Asia, where vital statis
OCEANIA
tics are notably defective but where apparently reason
American Samoa Midway Islands
able estimates have been derived from demographic sur
Australia Nauru
vey results. Constructed in this way, the table meets the
British Solomon Is New Caledonia
need for a ready reference to current, more or less com
lands NewGuinea (Aust.)
parable rates. It must be emphasized, however, that spe
Canton andEnderbury New Hebrides
cial qualifications have had to be omitted for lack of
Islands New Zealand
space, and reference must be made to the corresponding
Christmas Island Niue
trend tables for more precise information in terms of
Cocos (Keeling) Is- NorfolkIsland
coverage, basis of tabulation and general limitations.
lands PacificIslands
The reference date set forth in the table is that com
Cook Islands Papua
mon to the birth and death rates; when the date for
Fiji Islands Pitcairn
other rates differs from this, it is given in a footnote.
FrenchPolynesia Tokelau Islands
Gilbert and Ellice Is- Tonga Coverage: Table 3 contains rates for 108 countries and
lands Wake Island territories. These are the areas considered to have a re
Guam WesternSamoa liable birth and death rate, that is, those where registra
Hawaii tion of births and deaths is reported to be at least 90
per cent complete and those for which, in the absence
UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS of complete registration, a reliable estimate of the birth
and deathrate hasbeenmade.
Only national rates or those for the majorethnicgroup
Limitations: Beingderived essentiallyfrom data in Table I,
appear in Table 3; rates for cities, minor civil divisions
the estimates of population and area in Table 2 are sub
orminorethnicgroups have notbeen included, inasmuch
ject to all the basic limitations set forth in connexion
as the table's function is to provide rates which are pre
with that table.
sumed to be representative of the various indices for the
Likewise, the popUlation-increase rates and density
country as a whole.
indices computed on these base data are also affected by
the limitations of the original figures. However, it may Ratecomputation:Crudeannual birth, death, marriage and
be noted that in aggregating data for regional and con divorce rates derived from civil registers are the number
tinental totals, errors in the components may tend to of events reported for the calendar year cited, per 1,000
compensate each other and the resulting aggregates may persons present in the same geographic area at the mid
be somewhat more reliable than the quality of the indi point of the year in question. For estimated rates, the
vidual components would imply. method (if known) isgiven in footnotes to the table.
Because of their purelyestimated character, most of the Infant-mortality rates are the number of deaths oc
birth and death rates shown should be considered only as curred under one year of age, per 1,000 live births in
working indices, and not as measures of the true level of the same period, no adjustment having been made for
natality or mortality. Even in the areas for which rates the non-correspondence of the numerator and denomi
are estimated from recorded statistics, they are subject to nator.
all the limitations ofthose statistics, as set forth on p. 23. Fertility rates are the number of live births in the
Despite the fact that the method of estimation is the calendar year per 1,000 female popUlation aged 10-49
same as that used in constructing the average rates for years.
1951-55, 1952-56, 1953-57 and 1954-58 shown in the four Natural-increase rates are the difference between the
previous issues of the Demographic Yearbook, rates for crude birth and death rates.
29