DESCRIPTION OF TABLES
Table 1 When an official midyear estimate was not available
for a year in which a census had been taken, the results
,!,able.1~resents the results ofthe latest censusofpopu
of the enumeration are shown in the estimates column
latIOn dIstnbuted by sex, the 1953 and 1959 estimates of
but in bold-face type to distinguish them from the mid:
population in thousands, the type of the 1959 estimate
ye~r estimate. In a.few.cases, the 1959 estimate of popu
(see p. 19), the average annual per cent rate of popula
latIOn, though offiCIal, IS observed to be out of line with
tion growth (ordecrease) between 1953 and 1959and the
the res~lts of the 1960 census shown in an adjacent col
current areaand population density for each country and
umn. Sll~ce the cen~~sresult may be noted as provisional
territoryofthe world.
and subject to reVISIOn, and since the estimate has not
The countries and territories are arranged by con
yet been officially withdrawn, a footnote is appended to
tinents, with those in Africa appearing first, followed by
the latter to draw attention to its unrevised and possibly
those in North America, South America, Asia, Europe
erroneousnature.
and Oceania; the USSR is listed last, since it is partly in
~none ortwo caseswhere neither an enumerated popu
Europe and partly in Asia. Within each continent, sover
latIOn nor an official estimate was available unofficial
eign States are shown first, in English alphabetic order, estimat~s
have ?een shown for 1953 and/or 1959 in order
followed by non-sovereign territories set forth under the
~o prOVIde an Idea of the current size of the population
name of their respective administering authority and also
In every part of the world. Such unofficial estimates are
distinguished as to their administrative status, i.e., de
identified in the table by the symbol "x" or a footnote
pendencies, trust territories, condominiums, military gov
specifyingtheirsource.
ernmentandsoforth.
The type-of-estimate code, the construction of which
In so far as possible, the classification reflects the situa
was described in detail on p. 19, is included in this table.
tion as of 31 December 1960. It, together with the exten
Together with information on underenumeration the
sive footnotes which describe the boundaries of the areas evaluati~n
code furnishes the basis for fairly precise of
in a detail not found elsewhere in the Yem-book, makes
the 1.959estimates of population-wherever they appear
this the reference table of the volume in respect of sover
and It may also ?e assumed to apply less precisely, per
eignty and territorial composition.It is also the reference
haps, to the estImate for 1953. On the basis of this
for nomenclature inEnglishandFrench, incorporatingas
assumption and other available information as described
itdoes the most recent official forms ofcountry names.26
on p. 22, estimates for both years have been classified as
Unless otherwise indicated, both census and estimates
reliable or of questionable reliability, and those believed
relate to the modified present-in-area population as de
to be of questionable reliability are set in italics rather
scribed on p. 17.
thaninroman type.
In so far as possible the figures presented in the census
The code has been omitted in two instances, namely
columns of Table 1 are the results of censuses27 or
where a figure for the current date (1959) was not avail
sample surveys designed to obtain a count of individ
able ~nd where the. ~gure for an area was a composite,
uals. To be included, these censuses or surveys need not
resultIng from addItIOn or subtraction of estimates for
be national in scope; they may cover only part of the
component areas derived byvarying methods. Where the
territory oronlyone segment of the population, and they
code has not been applied, the fact is indicated by one
may bemore or less complete in terms of underenumera
dot (.). It should be emphasized that although codes are
tion. Estimatesofexcludedgroupsandunderenumeration
shown for all estimates other than the above, some small
are shown in footnotes when known.
populations are estimated by methods not easily classifi
The inclusion in Table 1 of all censuses provides an
able ~y the pn;sent scheme, and some small populations
inventory of recent census-taking activities throughout
are dIsproportIOnately affected by the frequent arrival
the world. It makes possible the identification of coun
and ?eparture of m.i~ants,visitors, etc., with consequent
tries which have never carried out any type of census,
relatively large va.natIOns between de facto and de jure
those which have taken a census of limited scope in
populatIOn, asvanouslydefined. The classificationofesti
termsof persons enumerated and those which have taken
ma.tes .for some of the small populations, therefore, is
a true national census. The practice of including sample
qUite Inadequate as an assessment of their presumable
survey results provides the same information for this in
reliability.
creasingly popular method of estimating population, and
The area figures, given in square kilometres, relate to
it also makes available base population figures for areas
~he total area of the specified geographic units, including
which either have had no previous census or none in re
mlandwateraswell assuchuninhabitedoruninhabitable
centyears.
stretches of land as may lie within the boundaries. Whol
Unless otherwise specified, estimates refer to the mid
ly uninhabited areas, such as the polar regions and a few
year, i.e., to the population at 1July of the relevant year.
small islands, are usually excluded from the statistics.
However, in the absence of a midyear estimate, a mean
Area estimates are official unless marked with the symbol
of two successive end-year (31 December) estimates may
"x". Areas reported in square miles have been converted
have been used; no distinction is made between these
to square kilometers, using the factor 2.589998.
two types of midyear estimates, on the assumption that
thedifference involvedisnegligible. Coverage: Table 1 includes data for 270 separate geo
graphic units, that is, all countries, territories and com
..Seep.13. ponent parts of collective territories which have at least
'"For a definition of a census and methods of enumerating see
4, 50 inhabitants. The stub of this table is, therefore, the
Handbook of Population Census Methods, Vol. I, op. cit., pp. 89.
98. most comprehensive of any in the Yearbook.
26