as encompassing these, as well as statistics of adoptions, the law is implemented and the degree to which the
legitimations, recognitions, annulments and legal separa public complies with the legislation determine the reli
tions. ability of the vital statistics obtained from the civil
Thefactors which affect international comparability of registers.
vital statistics are much the same as those which must be
considered in evaluating the variation in population sta Evaluation ofcurrentstatistics
tistics. Differences in geographic and ethnic coverage of Deficiencies in vital statistics are often fairly obvious,
the data; variation in the reliability of the statistics, i.e., especially when these statistics are expressed as rates.
in completeness of registration; diverse tabulation proce However, evaluation of quality based only on examina
dures; differences in statistical definitions ofvital events tion of the tabulated series can be very misleading. To
all thesemayinfluencecomparability. obtain more basic information on this point, the United
Standards for improvement of vital statistics in respect Nations in 1956made a specialinquiry as to the national
of these factors and others have been set forth in the estimates of completeness and accuracy of data, using the
Principles for a Vital Statistics System.15 The utility of Demographic Yearbook annual questionnaire to carry
these international recommendations for improvement out the survey. This inventory has been systematically
and standardization is further developed, and their ap extended and refined as new information on reliability
plication to national situations assisted, by a Handbook becameavailable.
of Vital Statistics Methods.16 The Handbook also dis On the basis of information accumulated from direct
cusses in detail the possible sources of error in vital sta correspondence or from relevant official publications, it
tistics, which will beoutlinedbelow, and reference should has been possible to classify national vital statistics into
be made to itfor further details. three broadcategories,asfollows:
C Those stated to be relatively complete, i.e., rep
SOURCES OF VARIATION
resenting at least 90% coverage of the events oc
curring each year.
Fragmentarycoverage- geographic and ethnic
U Those stated to be unreliable, that is, less than
Despite the fact that the obtaining of statistics of live
90% coverage.
births, deaths, foetal deaths, marriages and divorces has
been given priority in the United Nations recommenda Those concerning which no specific information
tions, the availability of such statistics varies widely,17 is available.
This is due in part to lack of uniformity and universality
The way in which the classification was made did not
in nationallegislation. In some areas, registration is com
permit the application ofuniform, objective criteriawith
pulsory for only births and deaths; in others, it is com
respect to reliability. In many cases, the basis for the
pulsory for only a part of the population (e.g., Euro
country's own evaluation of the data was not given.
pean, civilized or non-indigenous population). In still
Nevertheless, it was felt that under the circumstances
other countries, such as India and Pakistan, there is no
national statistical offices were in the best position to
national provision for compulsory registration, but only
judge the quality of their data and that even the very
municipal or state ordinances which do not cover the
broad categories C and U that could be established
entire geographic area. Still other countries (e.g., In
would be useful in furnishing some indication of the
donesia) have developed registration areas which com
validity of the statistics presented in this Yearbook.
prise only a part of the country, the remainder being
The results of this classification (C, U or ...) appear
excluded for reasons of inaccessibility or because of eco
in the first column of the trend tables, Nos. 13, IS, 16, 17,
nomic and cultural considerations that make regular
20 and 22, which show total frequencies and rates for
registrationa practicalimpossibility.
live births, deaths, infant deaths, foetal deaths, marriages
Examination of the tables will show that the vital
and divorces. Here also, in the form of footnotes, will be
statistics coverage for Africa is particularly spotty, being
found the exactvalues-when they exist-upon which the
confined largely to data for the European population
U codewasbased.
with, as a rule, only a few partial statistics and estimates
In addition to showing the quality code in each trend
for the indigenous segments. Similarly, the coverage is
table, data coded U and those for which reliability is
uneven and the statistics incomplete and unreliable for
unknown (...) are typeset in italics to distinguish them
much of Asia and parts of Latin America. The frag
quicklyfrommorereliablefigures.
mentary nature of available statistics is one important
limitationtointernational comparability. Evaluation oftimeseries
Reliability Evaluation of the quality of a time series of vital sta
tisticsis a more difficult matter. Since estimatesofcurrent
In addition to the variations which arise because of
reliabilityare based on conjecture inlarge part, objective
lack of national provision for registration, there are also
evaluationsfor prioryears tend to be non-existent. In the
differences in the effectiveness with which national laws
absence of earlier measures of reliability, therefore, it
operate in the various countries. The manner in which
wasdecided to assume that the qualityof the entire series
1J$Ibid. was the same as that for the current data; hence, the time
i.United Nations. Statistical Office. Handbook of Vital Statistics
trends are set in italics if the code for the current year
Methods. Document ST/STAT/SER.F/7, April 1955,258 pp. (Sales
No.55.XVII.l) isunreliable (U) orunknown (...).
11For a regional analysis of the geographicand ethnic coverage of
It is recognized that this method is not entirely valid,
birth and death statistics, see the 1956 Demographic Yearbook,
ChapterI,TableJ,p. 15. because it is known that in earlier years, many of the
23