dividuals or households from which a balance can up to date, and the code d is applied. Except in
be struck at convenient time intervals, usually the the rare instance of a nearly stationary population,
end of the calendar year. The essence of a popula estimates of this type are considered less reliable
tion register is the assembling of vital records for than those where at least a plausible rate of popula
each individual living in an area at a selected time, tion change has been assumed.
the addition of records resulting from birth or ar
x: When official estimates are not available, unofficial
rival and the withdrawal of records on death or
population estimates for the current year are pre
departure. Current population estimates obtained
pared in the United Nations Secretariat. In these
by this method are sometimes of the highest order of
instances, the time adjustment results from a method
accuracy, especially where the registers are syste
in which the rate of population growth in a par
matically checked against population-census sched
ticular area is related to the population growth of
ules to eliminate such erroneous entries as may have
a larger region of which the area forms part.t2 Since
accumulated. Hence, though current estimates are
no detailed study of the particular conditions in the
obtained directly from the register, the nature and
area is made, this time adjustment, coded x, may
recency of independent base measurements of the
often be less realistic than an assumed rate used by
populationremain relevant.
authorities within the area (coded c). On the
h: The method of time adjustment is coded h when other hand, the results are probably more reliable
the recorded number of births and deaths (i.e., the than those estimates (coded d) in which no at
natural increase) ,and possibly also recorded arrivals tempt at time adjustment is made.
and departures (i.e., the migratory balance), have
Unknown: Where the method of time adjustment has
been utilized to bring a base population figure up
not been ascertained, but the nature of the basic
to date. Provided that the records are complete and
population measurement is known, the fact is indi
accurate, this calculation method can result in relia
cated by two dots (••) following Parts I and II of
ble population estimates, since every component of
the code. In some instances, where a new base
population change will have been taken into ac
measurement has been secured quite recently, it is
count. Countries differ, however, in the magnitude
of their migratory balances relative to the size of the to be presumed that the method of time adjustment
has not yet been determined but will tecome evident
population. Hence, accounting for migratory move
in subsequent years.
ments may be an important element for population
estimates in some countries while in others, failure
Part IV of the code consists of a numeral subscript
to account for net migration introduces only slight
intended to qualify further the method of time adjust
or negligible errors in the resulting population
ment, except where this is undetermined (code .), where
estimates.
it was carried out unofficially (method x) or not carried
c: Where population change over time is estimated outat all (d). One set ofqualifications is relevant to con
rather than calculated from recorded change in the tinuous population registers (coded a) and to calcu
components, the method of time adjustment is coded lated balances of natural increase with or without a
c. Any estimate of population change depends on migratory balance (code h); different considerations
an assumption, whether it is based on a rate of apply where estimates are brought forward by means of
change observed in the same population during some assumed rates of growth (coded c).
past time period or on observations made in some
other population, and regardless of the mathe Qualification of a or h, i.e., population registers or
natural-increase method
matical formula which is being applied. There is
no a priori reason for regarding one type of assump I: The subscript 1means that births, deaths, immigra
tion as more reliable than another. It can be pre tion and emigration have been adequately ac
sumed that the assumption selected for officially counted for. In other words, even an extreme com
estimating population, basedon available knowledge bination of possible errors in the four components
in each instance, will ordinarily be one which ap of the balance is unlikely to exceed 5 persons per
pears somewhat reasonable or plausible. But the 1,000 population per year of the period over which
element of judgment involved cannot be objectively the adjustment extends.
classified. Population estimates carried forward with
2: The subscript 2 is used when the accounting ade
a judiciously selected assumption of the mode of in
quacyis unknown.
crease can happen to be as accurate as those brought
3: The subscript 3 is used when independent tests or
up to date with recorded balances of natural and
calculations show that an error of 5 persons per
migratory increase, at least where the latter records
1,000 population per year of the period in ques
are noticeably deficient. But, in view of the inevi
tion may have been exceeded.
table arbitrariness in the selection of a seemingly
suitable assumption, a time adjustment of type c Qualification ofc,theassumed-rate-of-growth method
can never be as reliable as one of type h, at least
In the case of time adjustments by assumed rates of
when the records of population change are relatively
growth, the basis for a judicious selection of a suitable
accurate.
assumption depends largely on the frequency and peri-
d: Where a base population figure has been held con
stant for two or more consecutive years, it can be Th 1 e 2T F he ut m ur e e tho G d ro is w d th esc a r t ibe W d o i r n l : d U P n o it p e u d la N ti a o ti n o . ns D . o P c o u p m ul e a n t t ion ST B / r S a O nc A h j .
presumed that no attempt has been made to bring it SER.A/28, 1958,pp. 18-19. (Sales No.58.xm.2)
21