to currentofficial nomenclatureor terminology, the coun· It should be emphasized that the designations em
try names used therein being the full official titles in ployed and the presentation of the material in this
use in the United Nations as of 31 December 1960.1 publication do not imply the expression of any opinion
In other tables, however, it has been found convenient whatsoever on the part of the Secretariat of the United
-because of space limitations-to use abbreviated or Nations concerning the legal status of any country or
short titles for some areas. The shortened titles employed territory or of its authorities, or concerning the delimita
in Tables 3-23 are United Kingdom for the United King tion of its frontiers. They were adopted solely for the
dom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United purpose of providing a convenient geographic basis for
States for the United States of America, USSR, Byelorus the accompanying statistical series. The same qualifica
sian SSR and Ukrainian SSR for the Union of Soviet tion applies to all notes and explanations concerning the
Socialist Republics, the Byelorussian Soviet SocialistRe geographic units for which data are presented.
public and the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, re
spectively.
EVALUATION OF QUALITY OF DATA
Arrangement of names
The attempt to differentiate demographic statistics ac
The arrangement of the country names in the stub and
cording to their degree.of accuracy, begun in the 1959
box-heads of the tables is of two types.
issue, has been continued in this Demographic Yearbook.
Table I shows, for each continent and for the USSR
Distinction is achieved through the use of two different
separately (beginning with Africa and proceeding in
type fonts-roman type for reliable data and italics for
English alphabetic order), all of the major geographic
those ofquestionable reliability.
units of the world, classified according to broad ad
The basis of the dichotomous quality classification of
ministrative-status groups. Names shown first in each
the population series shown in Tables 1-12 was the code
continent (without a category heading) represent sov
for estimates developed originally in 1950 and progres
ereign states; these are followed by territories and de
sivelymodified since that time. Details of the theory and
pendencies, trust territories, areas under military govern
construction of the code, as well as the justification for
ment and condominiums, eachgroupfurther classifiedby
its use in evaluation, are set forth on p. 19.
administering authority. All names within a category are
Vital statistics have been classified as reliable or un
arranged in English alphabeticorder.
reliable according to the degree of completeness with
Tables 3-23, on the other hand, show only those geo
which current vital events are registered. As in previous
graphic units for which statistics are available, and these
Yearbooks, completevital statisticsare judged to be those
names are arranged in straight English alphabetic order
which represent at least 90 per cent of the total of births,
within continents. The name of the administering au
deaths, marriages and divorces occurred in a year. The
thorityis notshownexceptin those caseswhere confusion
series said to be complete or reliable have been set in
mightresult because two territories have identical names.
roman type, while others of lesser or of unknown reli
Because of their number and importance, changes in
abilityaresetin italics. TheregularC and U code, which
names, administration and status which occurred during
is the basisof classification, may be found as usual in the
calendar 1960 are described in all the tables, rather than
trend tables and the details of its formulation are given
in Table I only. For convenience, they are also set forth
on p. 23.
below in chronological order. Changes which occurred in
To supplement and reinforce the rough classification
1959 and previous years have been described in previous
described above, known variations in definitions and in
issues of theDemographicYearbook.
methods of estimation and tabulation are, as usual, set
1960 FormerName Current Name Nature of forth in footnotes to each table. The implications of the
Change qualifications, as well as sources of error and possible
1January FrenchCameroons Cameroun Independence misinterpretation, are reviewed in the special text for
andname
27 April FrenchTogoland Togo Independence each table beginning on p. 26.
andname Age-reporting errors in census returns were first ana
20June SudaneseRepublic Mali Independence lysed, and censuseswere classifiedaccording to reliability,
and name
20June Senegal Senegal Independence in the 1952 Demographic Yearbook. This basic evalua
25June MalagasyRepublic Madagascar Independence tion appearedineachsucceedingYearbook through 1955;
and name
in this issue, ithas beenre-introduced on page 18.
26June BritishSomaliland Somalia (part) Independence
and name Another qualifying index, re-introduced in the 1953
30June BelgianCongo Congo (Leopold- Independence Yearbook, has been continued. This is a dagger (t)
ville) andname
1July Somaliland Somalia (part) Independence used to distinguish those statistics which have been tabu
(Italian) andname lated according to the year of registration of the vital
1August Dahomey Dahomey Independence event, rather than by the year of its occurrence. The im
3August Niger Niger Independence
5August UpperVolta UpperVolta Independence portance of this quaHfication, especially in evaluating the
7August IvoryCoast IvoryCoast Independence quality oflive birth statistics, cannot be overemphasized;
11 August Chad Chad Independence
a detailed exposition ofits implications will be found on
13August Ubangi-Shari CentralAfrican Independence
Republic andname p.24.
15August MiddleCongo Congo (Brazza- Independence
ville) andname
16August Cyprus Cyprus Independence 1For a majority of the areas, see: United Nations. Terminol
17August Gabon Gabon Independence ogy Unit. Names of Countries and Adjectives of Nationality. Docu
1October Federationof Nigeria Independence mentST/CS/SER.F/165, 9 March 1960, 28 pp., mimeo., and Revised
Nigeria Addenda to Terminology Bulletin No. 165. Document ST/CS/
28November Mauritania Mauritania Independence SER.F/165/Add. 1-6/Rev. 1,30September 1960.
14