AREA
Statistics ofterritorialexpanse or area will be found in area figures are based on geodetic surveys, carried out by
Tables I and 2 of this issue. Table 1 shows the most modern scientific means; others are simply conjectures
recent area estimate for every geographic unit of the based on random items of information. Some values are
world; Table 2 shows aggregate area for each continent, of recent origin, reflecting current knowledge and signifi
region and the world. Unless otherwise specified, all of cant territorial changes up to the present time; others
these figures are assumed to represent total area, that is, are not so timely and may thereby fail to take cognizance
they comprise the land area and inland waters, excluding of recent boundary rectifications. Since neither the exact
only polar regions and some uninhabited islands. Inland method ofdetermining the area nor the precisedefinition
waters are assumed to consist of major rivers and lakes. of its composition and time reference is known for all
countries, the values in Table 1should not be considered
strictly comparable from country to country.
SOURCES OF VARIATION
Apparent inconsistency with previously published fig
Lack of comparability between area statistics arises ures may be due to the introduction of improved esti
primarily from differences in definition; for example, mates, to increasesin actual land surface by reclamation,
total-area figures cannot be considered comparable with or to a change in the unit ofmeasurement used. Since the
land area unless the amountof inland water in a country reason for revision is not always ascertainable, the latest
is negligible.The term "inland water" also may vary in figures have been arbitrarily accepted as correct and
meaning from one country to another; in one, it may substituted for values previously on file.
comprise only major rivers and lakes (in accord with the In this Yearbook, area is given in square kilometres,
standard), while in others, it may include, in addition, the conversion from square miles (if required) having
coastal bays, inlets and gulfs. Variations of this type be been accomplished by equating 1square mile to 2.589998
tween countries with long coastlines can jeopardize com square kilometres. Use of a different factor would give
parability. slightly different results. Rounding also may affect the
Another problem concerns the basic area data. Some lastdigitofthe value.
POPULATION
This twelfth issue of the Demographic Yearbook fea different countries is one of the most important factors to
tures population trends during the forty-year period, be consideredinevaluatingcomparability.
1920-1960. Hence, population statistics account for the
first twelve of the twenty-three tables, and they cover De facto and de jure
national trends in suchvariables as: age and sex; popula
The total population of a country is conventionally
tion in places of 20,000 and over and 100,000 and over; described as de facto or de jure. A true de facto or
urbanization; literacy; economic activity, and marital
present-in-area concept usually implies that all persons
status. In addition, the population of selected cities is physically present in the country-residents and non
givenas well as the geographic distribution of population residents-have been counted in the local area where
throughout the world.
they were at the time of the census. The de jure count,
Certain types ofvariation will be seen in the data. Na in contrast, comprises all persons who usually reside in
tional classification schemes are not always the standard the area, irrespectiveofwhere they mighthappen to be at
used in the Yearbook tables; definitions and concepts of
the time of the census. Simple as these concepts appear,
various characteristics differ from country to country.
strict conformity to either of them is rarely found. More
This type of variation will be indicated on the tables over, even when these terms are used with precision to
whenever possible and discussed in connexion with describe the method of obtaining sub-national totals in
specific distributions.2
a national census of population, they are often mislead
Thereareothermorefundamental sourcesofvariation, ing when applied to the national figures in an inter
however, whichare common to all population data. They national context. Also, the terms may correctly describe
include the lack of comparability due to variation in the
the methodof enumeration (i.e., placeofresidenceversus
composition of the total population of areas, the prob
place of occurrence) but be incorrect when applied to
lems ofmeasuring underenumeration and omissions, and the tabulations.
the difficulties of evaluating the reliability of population
The wide variation which exists in the actual compo
estimates. These are discussed below.
sition of national census totals defined as de facto and
de jure can be seen from Table A, page 16, which shows
SOURCES OF VARIATION how certain sub-groups of the population were treated in
the censuses taken between 1945 and 1954in 52 sovereign
Definition of total population countries. It seems evident that the terms de facto and
Variation in the coverage of the population totals for de jure, though traditionally accepted, fail to convey a
clear understandingof the basic population composition.
Moreover, becausethe termsaresolooselyused, theyhave
Me 2 t F h o o r ds. fu S r t t u h d e i r es d i i n scu M ss e i t o h n o , ds s , ee Se H rie a s nd F b , o N ok o.5 o , f R P e o v. pu I lat ( i U o n n ite C d en N su a s almost lost international meaning. Nevertheless, they are
tions Publication,Sales No.: 58XV11.6,Vols. I, 11, 111.) the terms encountered in connexion with national sta-
15