Cshapes 2.0: Documentation
Guy Schvitz
guy.schvitz@gess.ethz.ch
December 21, 2018
1 Overview
Cshapes 2.0 is a GIS dataset that provides historical maps of independent states and
dependent territories from 1886 to 2017. Throughout this period, the data records
changes in each country’s borders, political status 1, and other relevant information,
such as changes in a country’s capital. The ﬁnal dataset comes with an extensive
documentation that contains background information on (1): changes in a country’s
status, (2) changes in a country’s borders and (3) where applicable, coding decisions.
This documentation uses the same basic layout as the EPR-Atlas, which provides
detailed information on ethnic groups in each country.
2 The Dataset
Before turning to the task itself, here is a brief overview of the structure of the dataset.
The data is stored as a GIS (vector) dataset, in which countries are represented by
polygons, along with attribute information. More speciﬁcally, the dataset consists of
a table, in which the columns/variables contain relevant attribute information, such
as a country’s name and political status. An additional column contains a polygon
that represents each country’s borders on the map. The rows of the table correspond
to country-periods, i.e. periods in which a country’s borders and attributes remained
unchanged. For each change in any of a country’s attributes or borders, the table
contains a new row, with its own start- and enddates. Your task will be to provide
background information on two types of change: (1) Changes in a country’s borders,
1I.e. a change from a status as a colony to an independent state.
1and (2) changes in a country’s political status. To provide an overview, here are all
the variables stored in the Cshapes dataset.
• gwcode: Country identiﬁer based on ? for independent states and ? for depen-
dencies.
• statename: State name (Aliases in brackets)
• startdate: Start date of the country-period
• enddate: End date of the country-period
• status: Political status of the territory: 1: Independent state. 2: Colony. 3:
Protectorate. 4: Leased territory. 5: Occupied.
• ruledby: For all dependencies we record the gwcode of the state that holds
sovereignty over this territory (e.g. for all british colonies: 200).
• capname: Name of the capital.
• caplong: Longitude of the capital
• caplat: Lattitude of the capital
• area sqkm: Size of the country’s territory (sqkm)
• b def: Dummy variable indicated if a country’s borders were clearly deﬁned (1)
or partly undeﬁned (0). In many colonies of the late 19th century, large parts of
the border remained undeﬁned.
• fid: Feature id, i.e. unique id of every row
• geom id: Unique id of every geometry
3 Coding Task
The documentation should provide background information on changes in a country’s
territory and or its political status in a chronological order. Each entry should be
properly referenced and should be relatively short (1-5 sentences in most cases.). In
addition, the document should also refer to the map material that was used. A ﬁle
with all the maps used for each country can be found here: /polybox/shared/Cshapes
Documentation Final/Map Sources/map sources list.csv
2We use Latex to create the documentation. Each chapter should be between half a
page and maximum three pages long. For each country, I have created an empty Latex
template ﬁle,which you can edit directly. I have also created a BibTex bibliography
ﬁle you can use for citations and to which you can add further sources. The ﬁles are
stored in the polybox-folder 2 and are named as follows: gwcode countryname.tex.
The template ﬁle contains the following ﬁelds and sections:
• Country name : Enter the country name as indicated in the dataset. Put aliases
in parentheses (E.g. Ghana (Gold Coast)).
• Country ID : Enter the country code, as indicated by the ﬁle name.
• Startdate: Enter the earliest start-date in our dataset (founding of country or
earliest observation in the dataset)
• Enddate: Enter the latest end-date in our dataset.
• Overview: Where applicable: Brieﬂy provide the most important information
on the following points: Is the country a predecessor/successor of another state?
(e.g. German Democratic Republic, gwcode 265 was a successor of Germany,
gwcode 250). Or did the country cease to exist for a period of time? For example,
Lithuania did not exist as a distinct territorial unit between 1945-1991, as it was
part of the Soviet Union during this period. If none of this applies, remove the
entire section.
• Changes: List the changes recorded in our dataset in chronological order, and pro-
vide a brief description. First, specify the exact date of the change in YYYY.MM.DD
format. In some cases, our dataset does not yet list the correct date, as our source
datasets often did not provide exact dates. In these cases, we used the ﬁrst of
January, or the ﬁrst of the month as a default. If you ﬁnd that the dates of terri-
torial changes in our dataset are incorrect, please note this in a separate word-ﬁle
that lists all inconsistencies. Second, brieﬂy describe the event that took place
(e.g. territorial gain/loss to country XYZ). Make sure to mention the political
events that led to the change, such as treaties, declarations of independence, for-
mal annexations, purchases, and provide adequate sources. Note that we only
code de jure changes in territory and sovereignty. Therefore, we code the day on
which for example a treaty was signed as the day a territorial change occurred.
2"/polybox/shared/Cshapes Documentation Final/New tex files"
3• Coding Decisions : If our coders provided information on their coding decisions,
brieﬂy describe the main coding decisions we made. 3. Usually coding decisions
concern potential instances of territorial change that we did not code as such.
Our coding rules excluded territorial changes in the following instances:
– Territorial changes below 10’000 sqkm
– Territorial exchanges between states that were unrecognized, and were re-
versed at some point (E.g. Japan’s occupation of Manchuria).
– Cases in which a de-facto secession occurred that lacked international sup-
port and recognition (e.g. Biafra).
– Territorial changes that occurred among warring parties during wartime,
but were reversed right after the end of the war (here, we only coded the
status quo before and after the war).
– Cases in which borders remained undeﬁned but no evidence of territorial
changes could be found. For example, a border between Saudi Arabia and
Oman was largely inexistent before 1952. Prior to this period however, we
could not ﬁnd any evidence that territory was exchanged between the two
prior to this period. In these cases, we backdated the current borders to
1886.
– In some cases, maps of the same region contradict eachother, which was
often due to conﬂicting territorial claims. In these cases, we opted for the
map that corresponded most to the region’s current borders.
– In some cases, maps were simply inaccurate, showing slightly diﬀerent bor-
ders compared to today. If we did not ﬁnd any evidence of territorial
changes, we ignored these discrepancies and backdated the current bound-
aries.
• Map Sources : Finally, list the maps that we used as sources to geo-code each
country period. We enter these references manually, in order to separate the
map entries from the overall bibliography. Follow the citation rules shown in the
template ﬁle.
The overall procedure is as follows:
1. Start with the ﬁrst unedited ﬁle in the ”New Tex Files” folder.
3I will also ﬁll in this part myself
42. Check if there is not already a .pdf version of the ﬁle in the ”Cshapes Docu-
mentation Final” folder. If there is one, you can copy the entries from the .pdf
version, if these are correct. If there is none, proceed editing the .tex ﬁle.
3. The folder ”Ctry Level Change Maps” contains a pdf for every country that pro-
vides a map of each country-period, along with the main relevant variables. For
changes in a country’s borders or status, we need an entry under Changes, as
explained above. Not that not every country-period corresponds to a change that
needs to be listed in the documentation, as changes may also stem from changes
in the capital city, or other attributes.
4. After listing the changes for each country, cite the maps that were used to code
each change.
3.1 Notes
Some additional notes:
• Obviously, most border changes aﬀected at least two countries at the same time.
In these instances, you can copy your change entry for one country, and paste
it to the ﬁle for the neighboring country if it was aﬀected by the same change,
adding perhaps only minor adjustments. This will ensure consistency and will
save you some time.
• For any questions of clariﬁcation issues, contact Guy.
References
5