Currency History | CBK
+254202860000
comms@centralbank.go.ke
Facebook
Twitter
Facebook
Twitter
Website Navigation Guide
Contact Us
Old Email
New Email
Home
About
CBK@60
Our Mission
History
Bank History
Introduction
Key Milestones
Governors
Banking Development
Currency History
Governance
Careers
Contact Us
Core Functions
Monetary Policy
Financial Markets
Forex
Bank Supervision
National Payments System
Banking Services
Currency Services
Invest
DhowCSD Portal
Kenya
Securities
Treasury Bills
Treasury Bonds
Regulations and Licensing
Government Securities Auction Rules
Benchmark Bond Programme Guidelines
Kenya Master Repurchase Agreement
Learning Centre
Publications
Reports
Monetary Policy Reports
Bank Supervision & Banking Sector Reports
AML/CFT/CPF
CBK Reports & Financial Statements
Financial Sector Stability Reports
Financial Inclusion and Datasets
Foreign Investment Survey
Diaspora Remittances Survey
National Payments Strategy 2022-2025
Kenya Electronic Payment and Settlement System Report
2025 Remittances Household Survey Report
Research
Books
Journal Articles
Working Papers
Discussion Papers
White Papers
Releases
Weekly Bulletin
Monthly Economic Indicators
Quarterly Economic Review
Statistical Bulletin
Monthly Economic Review
CBK Newsletter
Metadata
Public Notices
Diaspora Remittances
CBK Working Paper Series
Lists of Licencees
Conversions
Mergers & Acquisitions
Shareholding Information
Member Firms of the NSE
Licensing Procedures
Legislation & Guidelines
Circulars
Forms
Treasury Bills and Bonds
Financial Institutions
KEPSS/RTGS
Commemorative Coins
Internet Banking
Statistics
Rates
Foreign Exchange Rates
KESONIA
KESONIA Compounded Index
Repo & Reverse Repo
Horizontal Repo Market
Central Bank Rate
Discount Window
Bills  & Bonds
Treasury Bills
Treasury Bonds
Macroeconomic Statistics
Balance of Payment Statistics
Foreign Trade Summary
Principal Exports: Volume, Value and Unit Prices
Value of Selected Domestic Exports
Value of Exports to Selected African Countries
Value of Exports to Selected Rest of World Countries
Value of Direct Imports per Commodities
Value of Direct Imports from Selected African Countries
Value of Direct Imports from Selected Rest of World Countries
Monetary & Finance Statistics
Inflation Rates
Government Finance Statistics
National Accounts Statistics
Annual GDP
Exchange Rates
Interest Rates
Commercial Banks Weighted Average Rates
Central Bank Rates
National Payments System
KEPSS/RTGS
Automated Clearing House
Cheques & EFTs
DFCC
Payment Cards
Number of ATMs, ATM Cards, & POS Machines
Number of Transactions
Value of Transactions
Mobile Payments
Diaspora Remittances
News
News
Multimedia
Press Releases
Speeches
Presentations
i-Supplier Portal
Tenders
Fraud Safety
Select Page
Currency History
Early Currencies, Trade and Exchange
Before the onset of the modern day currency, Kenya’s communities traded and exchanged goods and services, one to another or using intermediaries that had been accepted for trade. Various items have surfaced from archaeological findings that have shown a thriving trade culture existed in the past. These items found in archaeological sites have helped historians and anthropologists to map out the early trade economies and identify the extent of contact between various communities. Barter trade was one of the primary forms of trade during these early periods.
The African economy as a whole, traded by exchange of goods and services under the Barter trade system. Close communities in Kenya exchanged pastoral and agricultural commodities. Trade caravans which came when the Arabs landed at the coastal towns of Kenya and Tanzania, created long distance trade channels for exchange. Through these special caravans, the exchange of ivory, salt and iron boomed.
Goods from the coast and the Indian Ocean were exchanged for rice, millet and bananas for local consumption while rock crystal, ivory, and rhinoceros horn were shipped overseas. Clothes, ivory and beads were popular items of trade among East African communities. Various trade routes were born linking the different communities and creating new demand and supply chains for various products from the different regions. But, with no clear form of measuring how much a good was worth in exchange of another, the upper hand was left to the trader that was least in need. The lack of common currency facilitated the growth of barter, with communities exchanging what they needed with what they already had in surplus.
The use of proto currencies such as cowrie shells (Cypraea Moneta), cloth, wire and beads in the hinterland began to form a key component of money for exchange during the early periods. It was an advancement of the barter trading system which already had its challenges of sub-division. Proto currencies were a pre-cursor to formal currencies and they were easily portable and divisible, while their utility (largely associated with ornaments) ensured that they were widely acceptable. In fact, by 1902 the half-cent coin was introduced to replace the cowrie (nsimbi), which had been used in Uganda.
Early Picture of East African men wearing Merikani Cloth
Notes and Coins
Early use of currency in Kenya commenced with the Arab influence who were among the first to use currency as we know it. In Muscat, they used a silver coin called the Maria Theresa Thaler (MT$), first minted in Austria in 1741 and, not surprisingly, they continued using it when the Sultanate moved to Zanzibar in 1832. By the 1860s, sailing ships from the relatively recently independent United States of America started to frequent Zanzibar, bringing not only a coarse cloth (merikani) as a commodity but also using the United States Silver dollar.
Around the same period, the silver rupee minted by the British East India Company (1600-1858) was increasingly being used along the Indian Ocean coast as the monsoon-dependent dhow trade with India expanded. These two silver coins were of the same quality but of different weights hence the exchange rate was determined by the quantity of silver in each.
The British chartered company, the Imperial British East Africa Company (IBEA), got the concession to trade in the area referred to as Kenya today. They then issued the Pice, Rupees and Annas as the currency of the region.
However, IBEA went bankrupt resulting in the Foreign Office taking responsibility of the area. A single coin, the copper Pice was minted and was the only piece of currency to bear the name East Africa Protectorate and unlike the Imperial British East Africa (IBEA) coinage which used Latin on the face.
The Indian Rupees and some of the IBEA fractional coins that were silver were still in use and hence easily exchanged with equivalent Indian coins of the same denomination (given weight and fitness).
Penetration of coins and notes only started when construction of the railway commenced in Mombasa in May, 1896, to reach Port Florence – present day Kisumu – in December, 1901. The construction, largely the work of Indian labour meant familiarity with the use of rupee coins and notes. The use of these rupees inland was noted by the different communities, introducing words into their languages for currency. The Pice was the common unit of exchange giving rise to the word “Pesa”.  Inland, various ethnic communities adopted the imported terminologies referring to money such as:
Kamba
– luvia,
Maasai
– iropiyani,
Kikuyu
– rubia,
Kipsigis
– Robia,
Pokot
– Ropyen,
Luhya
– Zirupia/Chirupa/tsirupia,
Teso
– Irupia,
Luo
– rupia ,
Kisii –
(off rail) chirupi,
Embu
– mbia,
Galla
– besa,
Gabbra
– besa,
Rendille
– besa/silinkini,
Turkana
– besa/ng’aropiyae
Somali
– laq
Interestingly, the adoption of these new words had not occurred with the foot caravans, which relied on trade good exchange.
After the World War I, the East African Protectorate was not left out in trying to cope with the challenges of the post war, economic environment. Into this confused money market, a decision was made in December, 1919, to replace the Mombasa Currency Board with a London based East African Currency Board (EACB) which would cater for the existing Protectorates as well as the newly acquired responsibility of providing currency to the Tanganyika Trust Territory.  The new coins would be for “East Africa”. At the same time, it was considered opportune to change the currency from Rupees and Cents to a currency convertible to sterling, thereby severing the link with India and implicitly reducing the economic strength of the Asian community.
The newly established EACB introduced an intermediate currency based on the English Florin with the thought that it would ease the transformation from Rupee to Shilling.  The Florin would be the same size and shape as the Rupee and also be of silver substrate.  This then became the advent of the shilling in Kenya. The shilling was however interchangeably used with the pound at a rate of twenty shillings to the pound and eventually only shillings and cents were used to independence.
As the East African territories became independent in sequence from 1962 the EACB ceased to issue notes with the image of the monarch and removed her name from the coinage. There was a desire by the three East African countries to establish a common East African Central Bank. Interim currencies were therefore introduced by the EACB to circulate within the region.
For the banknotes, the interim currency was commonly known as the “Lake Issue” currency because of the background of Lake Victoria on the notes. The notes all showed a dhow on Lake Victoria which was common territory to the three countries. The Lake Victoria designed notes were in the denominations of 5, 10, 20 and 100 shillings. For the first time, use of Hindi on the notes was dropped and Swahili first featured on these common currencies. However, Arabic was retained.
With the establishment of individual Central Banks for the three East African countries, Kenya began printing and minting its own currency under the mandate given to the Central Bank of Kenya in the Central Bank of Kenya Act cap 491. Banknotes for the Central Bank of Kenya, although not yet issued, were legalised under Legal Notice number 252 of 1966 dated 1st July, 1966. Coins were issued in April 1967. EACB banknotes ceased to be legal tender in September, 1967 while the EACB coins were demonetised in April 1969.
The initial issue of Kenya shilling notes were in the denominations of 5, 10, 20, 50 and 100 shillings, all bearing the portrait of the first President of Kenya, Mzee Jomo Kenyatta, in the front, and diverse scenes of economic activities in Kenya at the back. These notes were the first using the double title of Banki Kuu ya Kenya and Central Bank of Kenya.
On April 10, 1967, new Kenya shilling coins were issued in the denominations of 5 cents, 10 cents, 25 cents, 50 cents and 1 shilling. The coins were minted by the Royal Mint of U.K. and made from cupro-nickel. Like the notes, the obverse featured the portrait of Kenya’s founding father, Mzee Jomo Kenyatta. The reverse however featured the Kenyan coat of arms, a theme that has remained a dominant feature to the present series of coins.
Pre-Independence Coins Gallery
1780 Maria Theresa Thaler Obverse
1888 One Pice Obverse
1888 One Rupee IBEA Obverse
1890 Two Annas Obverse
1898 One Pice Queen Victoria Obverse
1907 One Cent Coin of King Edward VII Obverse
1920 Fifty Cents One Shilling Coin King George V Obverse
1920 Florin Coin of King George V Obverse
1936 Five Cent Coin of King Edward VIII Obverse
1937 Fifty Cents or Half Shilling Coin of King George VI Obverse
1950 One Shilling Coin of King George VI Reverse
1956 Ten Cents Coin Queen Elizabeth II Observe
1963 Fifty Cents or Half Shilling Coin Queen Elizabeth II Obverse
1964 5 Cents Obverse
1964 10 Cents Obverse
Pre-Independence Notes Gallery
1905 5 Rupees
1920 1 Florin Front
1920 1 Rupee
1921 20 Shilling Note Front
1943 1 Shilling Note Front
1943 5 Shilling Note Front
1958 100 Shilling Note Front
1964 100 Shilling Note Front
1964 20 Shilling Note Front
1964 10 Shilling Note Front
Special Currencies
To mark some national and central banking events, the Central Bank of Kenya has and continues to issue special commemorative currencies. These special currencies are limited in number and are specifically printed or minted to celebrate an event or in honour of a person. They form a historical reference point and memento for the country. Due to their speciality and use of precious materials like gold or silver, these currencies become very unique attracting demand from numismatic collectors or other individuals.
Special Currencies Gallery
1966 Set of 3 Gold Coins – 75th Anniversary, Birth of First President of Kenya Mzee Jomo Kenyatta:
10 Years of Freedom Single Coin – Brass coin issued to commemorate ten years of independence:
Gold Coins 1978 – Marking the day Daniel Toroitich Arap Moi was sworn in as second President of the Republic of Kenya:
Silver Coins 1978 – Marking the day Daniel Toroitich arap Moi was sworn in as second President of the Republic of Kenya:
20th Anniversary of CBK – Silver Coin commemorating 20 years of the Central Bank of Kenya:
10 Years of Nyayo Era – Silver Coin marking 10 years of leadership by Kenya’s second President, Daniel Toroitich arap Moi:
25 Years of CBK – Silver Coin commemorating twenty five years of the Central Bank of Kenya:
40 Years of Independence Gold Coin 5000 Shillings – Celebration of Kenya’s 40 years of independence in the year 2003:
40 years of Independence Coin and Note – Celebration of Kenya’s 40 years of independence in the year 2003:
40 years of Independence 40 Shilling – This circulating coin was also issued to commemorate 40 years of independence:
50 Years Gold Commemorative Coin – Celebration of 50 years of Kenya’s independence:
50 Years Gold Plated Silver Commemorative Coin – Celebration of 50 years of Kenya’s independence:
50 years Acrylic Block Commemorative Gold Plated Brass Metal Coin – Celebration of 50 years of Kenya’s independence:
Search for:
Daily KES Exchange Rates
US DOLLAR
129.76
STG POUND
171.62
EURO
146.40
More...
Posted On: 02-10-2026
Key Rates
Central Bank Rate
8.75%
11/08/2026
KESONIA
8.7505%
01/10/2026
CBK Discount Window
9.25%
11/08/2026
91-Day T-Bill
8.778%
05/10/2026
REPO
9.25%
15/10/2025
Inflation Rate
6.6%
August,2026
Lending Rate
14.34%
August,2026
Savings Rate
3.54%
August,2026
Deposit Rate
6.91%
August,2026
KBRR
8.9%
27/06/2016
QuickLinks
Forex
Tenders
Invest
News
Multimedia
Press Releases
Careers
Cost of Credit Website
MPC Press Briefing
i-Supplier Portal
Information Security Policy Statement
Research
Books
Journal Articles
Working Papers
Discussion Papers
Auction Results
Treasury Bills
Treasury Bonds
Recent News
2025 Bank Supervision Annual Report
Draft National Payment System Policy and National Payment System Bill, 2026
Draft CBK Prudential Guidelines, Risk Management Guidelines, Guidance Notes, and Framework for Domestic Systemically Important Banks
Next MPC Meeting
QuickLinks
Forex
Tenders
Invest
News
Multimedia
Press Releases
Careers
Cost of Credit Website
MPC Press Briefing
i-Supplier Portal
Information Security Policy Statement
Important Links
National Treasury
CBK Institute of Monetary Studies
Kenya Deposit Insurance Corporation
Kenya Bankers Association
Bankreturns Portal
Non-Bankreturns Portal
Templates/Software Downloads
M-AKIBA
Recent News
2025 Bank Supervision Annual Report
Draft National Payment System Policy and National Payment System Bill, 2026
Draft CBK Prudential Guidelines, Risk Management Guidelines, Guidance Notes, and Framework for Domestic Systemically Important Banks
Next MPC Meeting
Central Bank of Kenya
Haile Selassie Avenue
P.O Box 60000 - 00200
Nairobi, Kenya
+254 20 286 0000
+254 20 286 1000
+254 20 286 3000
+254 709 081 000
+254 709 083 000
comms@centralbank.go.ke
Facebook
Twitter
© 2017 Central Bank of Kenya