PDFPAGE1
1
CBK Newsletter
INSIDE THIS ISSUE
Issue 2                              16th March, 2011
CENTRAL BANK OF KENYA Keeping you informed
CBK NEWSLETTER
Word from the Governor
1
Launch: Kenya Policies for Prosperity
2
Financial Inclusion
6
Changes in Economic Perception
9
Government Bonds
12
CBK and the Constitution
18
Patron
Governor
Deputy Patron
Deputy Governor
Chairman, Editorial Board
Stephen Mwaura
Editor
Samson Burgei
Assistant Editor
Nancy Sang
Editorial Board
Joseph Mutava, Peter Gatere, Joyce
Yego, Cappitus Chironga, Daniel Ndolo,
Kate Kittur, Evans Muttai, Dr. Roseline
Misati, Samuel Tiriongo, Juliet Ongwae
and Peter Kitonyo
Reviewers
Matu Mugo, Dr. Dulacha Barako,
Chris Gacicio, Isaya Maana
Layout & Photography
Antahnas Mutinda
Nathan Kiawa
Contact us through:
editor@centralbank.go.ke
The CBK Newsletter is  published
quarterly by Communications Office,
Central Bank of Kenya, Haile Selassie
Ave., Nairobi.
E
ase of access to financial services
is a key contributor to a country’s
economic growth. In realisation of
this,Kenya has been making
commendable progress in fostering an
enabling environment  for financial
inclusion and deepening financial access
to the majority of its  citizens. Indeed, the
results of the Financial Access
(FinAccess) Surveys, conducted in 2006
and 2009 can attest to this. The surveys
revealed that the number of unbanked
population aged 18 years and above
dropped from 23 percent in 2006 to 18
percent in 2009.  During the same  period,
the proportion of adults accessing financial
services from Microfinance Institutions
(MFIs) and Savings and Credit
Cooperative Societies (Saccos) more than
doubled, from 8  to 18 percent  whereas
the proportion of adults accessing informal
financial services dropped. In addition, the
number of deposit accounts have
increased from 4.7 million in 2007 to 12.8
million in 2010. Of these accounts, 11.25
million are micro accounts (Ksh. 100,000
and below are fully covered by DPF).
These developments indicate that  the
initiatives instituted towards broadening
and deepening financial inclusion are
bearing fruits.
I strongly believe that it was in recognition
of our efforts that the Alliance for
Financial Inclusion (AFI) chose Kenya to
host its inaugural Global Policy Forum
(GPF) in Nairobi in September 2009. It
was not only an honor to the Central Bank
of Kenya to co-host the Forum, but also a
sign of confidence in Kenya’s budding
financial sector. CBK is also the current
Chair of AFI’s Steering Committee and
was further recognized in December 2010
by being invited as a non-G20 partner to
join the Global Partnership for Financial
Inclusion (GPFI). The GPFI will promote
and co-ordinate cross cutting Financial
Inclusion efforts in G20 and non-G20
countries.
The Central Bank will continue to
promote  measures within the law to
ensure  that financial services reach
even  more people. The key initiatives
that have been implemented include:
licensing of MFIs,  introduction of
agent banking, operationalization of
credit reference bureaus, promotion
of the use of mobile phone channels,
modernization of the national payment
and settlement system, to name but a
few.These developments are  in line
with the broader government financial
sector policy initiative that hinges on
three pillars: Access, Efficiency and
Stability aimed at achieving Kenya’s
Vision 2030 goals.
The Central Bank in partnership with
other players, including AFI and the
GPFI, will continue to spearhead
appropriate policy reforms and
interventions for the financial sector
to progress the country towards a
more financially included population
enjoying the attendant benefits of
growth and prosperity for all.
Prof. Njuguna Ndung’u, CBS
Word from the Governor
FINANCIAL SERVICES FOR ALL
CENTRAL BANK OF KENYA

PDFPAGE2
2
CBK Newsletter
C B K   N E W S
H
is Excellency The President, Hon. Mwai Kibaki,
officially launched the volume ‘Kenya:
Policies for Prosperity’ on 9th February, 2011
at the Kenyatta International Conference Centre.
Speaking at the launch, His Excellency the President
noted that the book ‘complements Vision 2030 by
evaluating policy options that would ensure a prosperous
Kenya, adding that ‘it was a rich source of information,
debate and analysis on the challenges and strategic
choices confronting Kenya.’
‘Kenya: Policies for Prosperity’ , a first in a new
series  Africa: Policies for Prosperity , is a
collaborative effort between the Central Bank of Kenya
and the Center for the Study of African Economies,
Oxford University, geared towards developing analytical
capacity at the local institutional level as well as
providing a variety of policy options that support Vision
2030.
The Book’s authors are drawn from a pool of accredited
local and international researchers and edited by Central
Bank Governor, Prof. Njuguna Ndung’u and Oxford
University Professors, Paul Collier and Christopher
Adam.
Addressing participants at the Launch, the Governor
noted that Central Bank of Kenya had benefited
‘Kenya: Policies for Prosperity’ Book Launched
From R to L: His Excellency the President, Hon. Mwai Kibaki
poses with the editors of the book, Prof. C. Adam, Prof. P.
Collier and Prof. N. Ndung’u during the launch.
immensely through capacity building and networking
with world renowned economists. An important lesson
learned, the Governor added, was that ‘collaborative
research between policymakers and academics ensures
formulation of practical solutions to practical problems.’
Spanning 17 chapters, the Book which draws lessons
from Kenya’s recent experiences, focuses on three
broad themes namely:- strategic choices that will
support growth and unlock the country’s potential;
macroeconomic policies including monetary, fiscal and
trade policies; and the environment for private sector
market activity, including multi-sectoral analysis and
the role of institutions in protecting the markets and
safeguarding democracy.
The Book, published by Oxford University Press, can
be ordered online through 
www.oup.co.uk or through
its local office, Oxford University Press, East Africa
Ltd., Nairobi, Tel:  273 20 41/2 – 9.
‘Collaborative research between policymakers
and academics ensures formulation of
practical solutions to practical problems.’

PDFPAGE3
3
CBK Newsletter
“
Every time you see growth in the market, watch
what is happening to the unit cost”, the Governor,
Prof. Njuguna Ndung’u said during the launch of
draft regulations for the electronic retail transfers and
electronic money issuers on 3rd February, 2011. The
Governor pointed out that usually transaction costs
decline when the market grows.
These regulations are intended to ensure that E-Money
Issuers and Payment Service Providers conduct their
businesses prudently and in accordance with the
provisions of relevant legislations including the Central
Bank of Kenya Act.
The Governor noted that, in the last four years since
the establishment of mobile phone money transfer
services, four mobile phone operators have already
launched the services and have enrolled over 15.4
million customers. They have recruited 39,449 agents
while total transactions have soared to Ksh.2.45 billion
a day and Ksh.76 billion a month on average as at
December 2010. This depicts a very productive market
for electronic money transfers.
These Regulations will be reinforced by the National
Payments System Bill, currently awaiting enactment
by Parliament. This will enable Kenya’s payment
system to comply with the Bank for International
Settlements (BIS) Core Principles and Central Bank
responsibilities while at the same time giving CBK
specific and enhanced powers over regulation of
payment systems in Kenya.
CBK Rel eases Draft El ectronic Payment Regulations
Mr. J. Kitili, Director, Banking Services & Risk Management
Dept. waves the draft  regulations after the launch. Looking on
are Messrs D. Porteous, the Governor, Prof. Ndung’u and S.
Mwaura .
T
he first global meeting focusing on   savings as
a function of financial inclusion was held in
Seattle, USA on 16th - 17th November, 2010.
The forum  discussed  innovative ways of reaching the
poor through banking beyond branches and leveraging
on technology.
At the forum, the Governor , Prof. Njuguna Ndung’u,
shared Kenya’s experiences in promoting financial
inclusion through frameworks that balance innovation
and safety. He also underscored the role of financial
inclusion in creating safe havens for the poor to save,
accumulate assets and uplift their living standards.
Also  at the forum were heads of government,
representives from banks and technology providers as
well as international development bodies .
Global
Savings
 Forum
Launch of GPFI in
Seoul, Korea
T
he G20 Global Partnership for Financial
Inclusion (GPFI) was launched in Seoul, Korea
on 10th  December 2010.
The formation of the GPFI was one of the key
resolutions by G20 leaders at the November 2010
Seoul Summit to promote financial inclusion
particularly for poor households and Small and
Medium Enterprises. CBK was invited to become
a non-G20 partner of the GPFI.
At the launch, Governor, Prof. Njuguna Ndung’u
delivered a speech on behalf of non-G20 partners
of the GPFI. In his remarks, the Governor said “I
am sure that the GPFI will serve as a highly
effective platform unfolding the convening power
of the G20 and encouraging the G20 and non-G20
members together to take global financial inclusion
to the next level”.
PDFPAGE4
4
CBK Newsletter
Let Credit Information Work for You
I
n the Kenyan context, a Currency Centre is an
establishment set up to provide currency services to
the population around it.  These centres are set-up by
the Central Bank of Kenya in conjunction with the Kenya
Bankers Association.
The need to introduce currency centres resulted
from the desire to minimise risks of currency transportation
and to cut down on operational costs which would be
passed on to customers. The creation of Currency Centres
therefore means that commercial banks do not have to
transport cash over long distances to the four CBK locations
of Nairobi, Mombasa, Kisumu and Eldoret Branches as often
as they did in the past.  Further, the establishment of the
currency centres is expected to support the Central Bank’s
clean money policy which aims at ensuring that currency
notes in circulation in the country is clean.
The pioneer Centre in Nyeri which was set up in
December 2009 has seen the number of banks using the
facility steadily grow from one in January 2010 to twelve by
December 2010. V olume of transactions has also been on
the rise and currently about 7 percent of all CBK’s physical
currency transactions with commercial banks are in Nyeri.
Data available at CBKindicate that more deposits than
withdrawals (negative currency in circulation) occur in the
Nyeri region and therefore the Centre is a perfect choice of
catchment for old currency.
The second of these Centres was opened in Nakuru
on 16th December 2010 and has since been providing cash
requirements to at least five commercial banks in Nakuru
and its environs. The currency centre is intended to serve
the 23 commercial banks and their branches represented in
the Nakuru region.
CBK and KBA are currently working on finalising
the set up of a third currency centre in Meru. Currency
centres apart from providing currency services to the
population, also work towards achieving the objective of
financial inclusion through reductions in transaction costs
associated with provision of financial services.
Prof. Ndung’u plants a tree at the newly opened Nakuru
Currency Centre. Banks are expected to translate the
benefits from lower transaction costs into cheaper  credit
and better service delivery.
C
redit Information comprises a person’s history
relating to borrowing from lenders. Credit
information sharing, in the Kenyan context,
therefore refers to the exchange of customers’ credit
information amongst institutions, licensed under the
Banking Act, through licensed Credit Reference
Bureaus (CRBs). The lenders submit customers’ credit
information to the licensed CRBs who collate it and
generate credit reports, which are then made available
to the lenders, at a fee, for their use when appraising
applications for credit facilities. Credit information
sharing reduces the incidence of non-performing loans
by reducing lack of information on customers and
facilitates borrowing particularly by Small and Medium
Enterprises (SMEs). SMEs can use the information
capital held by CRBs as collateral for loans as opposed
to the traditional use of physical collateral such as land
title deeds and motor vehicle log books.
Following the launch of the banking sector Credit
Information Sharing initiative in Kenya on 31st July
2010, all lenders were required to submit data on NPLs
to licensed CRBs on a monthly basis.  As at 31st
December 2010, one CRB, CRB Africa had been
licensed and the application for the second one,
Metropol CRB was at advanced stages of review. The
total number of credit reports submitted to CRB Africa
since rollout was 3,102,735 and credit reports requested
by the banks and customers were 284,722 and 434
respectively. The CRB regulations place strict
restrictions on the use and application of confidential
information. CRBs and banks are prohibited from
sharing information with unauthorized third parties. The
penalty admissible for breach of confidentiality is
Ksh.500,000 and Ksh.1 million for CRBs and banks,
respectively.
Moving forward, the CBK in partnership with Kenya
Bankers Association and other players will endeavor
to ensure that the credit information sharing mechanism
is not only robust but is also extended beyond the
banking sector to include other credit providers such
as Deposit Taking Microfinance Institutions, SACCOs,
Development Finance Institutions and Utility
Companies, among others.  It is only when all credit
providers are part of the credit information sharing
mechanism that the potential benefits of credit
information sharing will be optimized.
The Dawn of Currency Centres
PDFPAGE5
5
CBK Newsletter
NEWS IN PICTURES
From L - R: Ms J. Ikunyua, Asst. Director, DPFB, Evelyn Kilonzo
(BSD) and Mr. N. Koome (RBA) listen keenly to presentations
at the Financial Education Strategy retreat organized by the
Financial Education and Consumer Protection Partnership
(FEPP) held in Naivasha in  October 2010.
Prof. Njuguna Ndung’u (centre) and other dignitaries at the
2nd AFI Global Policy Forum in Bali, Indonesia.
Some members of staff from Reserve Banks of Malawi and
Zambia on a Financial Education tour in Kenya. The group
visited a Pilot Project organised by Faulu Kenya in Kayole,
and funded by FSD.
The Governor, Prof. Njuguna Ndung’u (seated right) and
CBK Bank Secretary, Mr. K. Abuga sign the Memorandum
of Understanding (MOU) for the collaboration of Financial
Sector Regulators, on 31st August, 2009.
Business editors of local media houses listen keenly to pro-
ceedings during their meeting with the Governor, Prof.
Ndung’u to discuss expansion of Financial Literacy in the
country.
CBK Directors wait for the Chief  Guest at the CBK stand
during the Nairobi International Trade Fair in September,
2010
PDFPAGE6
6
CBK Newsletter
M
ost poor people in the world lack access to sustainable financial services and the challenge to Governments
is normally how to address the constraints that exclude people from full participation in the financial
sector. In the last few years, a number of international development organizations as well as policymakers
in developing countries have been increasingly emphasizing the need to build more inclusive financial systems
as an essential part of the development agenda.
According to the United Nations, the bottom billion people around the world do not have access to formal
financial services like savings accounts, credit, insurance, and payment services. Further, more than half the
population in developing countries and more than 80 percent of households in most of Africa are financially
excluded. Financial inclusion therefore aims at providing timely delivery of various financial services at an
affordable price to these financially excluded households and micro, small, and medium-sized entrepreneurs.
Through increased access to savings accounts and other financial services, the poor can build financial security,
manage risks against adverse shocks such as illness or natural disaster, and even invest in new business
opportunities.  Improving access to finance also plays a crucial role in promoting economic growth and reducing
poverty.
Improving financial access
It is worth noting that microfinance was an initial effort to reduce poverty by improving access to finance for
the poor. Microfinance Institutions (MFIs) usually extend small loans to the poor who have no collateral or
credit history and cannot borrow from mainstream financial institutions.  However, microfinance alone cannot
expand financial access for the poor
and therefore building an inclusive
financial system is a more
comprehensive effort towards
financial inclusion. This effort
emphasizes that formal financial
institutions such as banks have an
important role to play in expanding
financial access to the poor. It also
stresses the importance of
governments’ role in creating a proper
environment to facilitate increased
financial access.
A well-functioning financial system is
a crucial part of
development,promoting economic
growth and reducing poverty.
Financial institutions and markets
mobilize savings, provide payment
services, allocate resources and
transform risk by pooling and
repackaging it.  When a financial
market functions well, funds will likely be allocated to the most productive users, which will contribute to
economic growth and poverty reduction.  However, when the market does not function properly, it loses growth
opportunities.
A financial system becomes more efficient and functions better when it is more inclusive.  As a financial system
becomes more inclusive, it provides more growth opportunities to more individuals and entrepreneurs.  However,
when the financial system serves only a limited segment of the population, the society is likely to lose opportunities
to grow.
Barriers to financial access
In order for policymakers to understand the impact of access to financial services and design effective policies
to improve access, it is important to measure access and identify the barriers to access. Identifying these
Women sew clothes at a local industry funded by SMEs through loans
Photo by NMG
MAIN FEATURE
Financial  Inclusion
The Bridge To Growth And Prosperity
PDFPAGE7
7
CBK Newsletter
Client withdraws money from an ATM using mobile phone.
Photo by NMG
barriers is an important part of measuring access. Major barriers include limited geographical access to a bank,
lack of appropriate documents (e.g., drivers licenses), and account fees of  minimum balance requirements.
By having access to financial services, poor households obtain reliable tools for managing their money.  Since
the incomes of poor households are unstable, their need for reliable financial services is greater than that of
richer households. On the other hand, when a firm has access to external finance, it is likely to grow faster.
Moreover, by having access to finance, small firms can allocate assets more efficiently, and can increase
innovation.  By contrast, when small firms face difficulties in obtaining external finance, they lose opportunities
to grow and innovate.
Governments can contribute to improving access to finance through appropriate policies and legislation.  However,
experience suggests that not all government policies are helpful and governments’ direct intervention could be
counterproductive. Although reforming institutions and building infrastructure can take a long time, governments
can improve access to finance relatively fast by prioritizing certain institutional reforms and focusing on specific
infrastructure.  In particular, reforming information infrastructure such as building credit registries and improving
debt recovery procedures tend to generate fast results in improving access to finance. It is noteworthy that
governments can improve access by providing legislation and regulations that would allow market participants
to use innovative technologies (e.g., the Internet and cell phones) to reduce the cost of providing financial
services significantly.
Mobile phone banking
While banks invest substantial amounts of money for infrastructure and personnel under the traditional branch-
banking approach, mobile phone banking allows banks to provide financial services at reduced costs. Kenya’s
mobile phone payment services is a good example of how using modern technology with government’s supportive
policies and proper regulation can provide financial services to millions of poor people at low costs. (The
government’s appropriate policy actions made this impressive success possible).  First, the government created
a favorable environment to expand the mobile phone market. Second, it engaged the private sector in its policy-
making process to make sure that government will provide support for service providers and to evaluate possible
risks to financial stability. Third, the government strategically chose to allow technological innovations before
enacting appropriate legislation in order to expand access to finance.
Allowing new products into the market in the absence of relevant legislation may compromise financial stability.
However, the government successfully balanced access with stability by carefully monitoring the market and
enhancing oversight capacity to ensure that  financial stability was maintained.
Governments can also improve access by facilitating competition.  As competition intensifies, incumbent financial
institutions are likely to extend
services to new markets and try
new, cost-effective technologies in
an effort to find new ways to
increase profits.  However, it is also
important to make sure through
regulatory measures, that intense
competition would not result in
reckless and improper lending
practices.
While governments’ role in creating
an appropriate environment to
facilitate access is important, the
scope of their direct intervention
is limited, and direct intervention
programs require careful
monitoring.
http://www.uiowa.edu/ifdebook/
faq/faq_docs/Financial_Inclusion.shtml
Ref:
PDFPAGE8
8
CBK Newsletter
Q and A
 Financial Inclusion explained
Q: What is Financial Inclusion?
Ans: The Centre for Financial Inclusion  defines Financial Inclusion as a state in which all people who can use
financial services have access to a full suite of quality financial services, provided at affordable prices, in a
convenient manner, and with dignity for the clients. Financial services are delivered by a range of providers,
most of them private, and reach everyone who can use them, including disabled, poor, and rural populations.
However, according to the World Bank, nearly three billion people in developing countries have little or no
access to formal financial services that can help them increase their income and improve their lives.
Q: Why Financial Inclusion?
Ans: Financial inclusion aims at drawing the "unbanked" population into the formal financial systems so that
they have the opportunity to access a variety of financial services ranging from credit, savings and payments to
transfers and insurance services. In addition, according to the United Nations, in order to achieve the objective
of economic growth, it is imperative that infrastructure is developed together with increased financial inclusion.
A country cannot tackle poverty and foster economic growth when the majority of its people have limited access
to financial services. Therefore, to achieve equitable economic growth and development, it is necessary that the
majority of a nation's people have access to appropriate and affordable financial services and products in order
to enhance their quality-of-life and ultimately economic development.
Q: What is the Central Bank doing about Financial Inclusion?
Ans: In recognition of the importance of financial inclusion towards realisation of desired economic growth
and poverty alleviation, the Central Bank of Kenya and other players have undertaken several policy and
regulatory reforms aimed at enhancing the level of financial inclusion in Kenya. The key initiatives which have
been implemented to this end include:-
• The licensing of deposit taking microfinance institutions, whose primary focus is the low income households
and Small and Micro Enterprises, that are concentrated in the rural and peri-urban areas. CBK has granted
licences to Faulu Kenya, Kenya Women Finance Trust, REMU and SMEP to carry out nationwide deposit-
taking microfinance business. UWEZO DTM has been licensed to offer community microfinance services
in Starehe Division, Nairobi.
• The implementation of the Agent Banking Guidelines in May 2010 allowed Commercial Banks to partner
with third parties like shops, petrol stations and chemists to offer specified banking services on their behalf.
This is aimed at increasing the outreach of banks to most corners of the country at a reasonable cost and
without compromising the quality of banking services. Six banks have been granted approval to rollout their
agency networks.To date the Central Bank has approved over 6,000 agents.
• The licensing of CreditReference Bureaus, which provide an opportunity for individuals and businesses to
rely on their good credit history as an alternative form of collateral, unlike the traditional physical collateral,
to secure credit facilities from banks.
• Promotion of the use of technology enabled financial services using platforms such as M-pesa, Zap, Pesa-
pap and YuCash.
• Promotion of consumer education and awareness campaign initiatives in order to enhance financial literacy.
CBK is a member of the Financial Education and Consumer Protection Partnership whose objective is to
develop a comprehensive National Strategy for Financial Education for Kenya.
• Amendment of the Banking Act to include provisions that permit banks to launch innovative products that
serve the diverse needs of the Kenyan populace. These include amendments that facilitated Shariah
compliant banking and the operation of current accounts by mortgage finance companies.
MAIN FEATURE  -  Q & A
PDFPAGE9
9
CBK Newsletter
S
ince September 2009, the Monetary Policy
Committee (MPC) has been conducting bi-
monthly market surveys. This idea arose from
interactions with monetary policy committees in other
countries. Those committees had benefited from
informal surveys which provided insights into the
business communities’ perceptions with respect to
various significant macroeconomic aggregates.
Initially, the survey instrument only covered the
commercial banks but by December 2009, it extended
to cover private sector non-bank firms. Initially, also,
the commercial banks did not regard the survey
seriously and hence did not provide adequate and
consistent answers to questions. This was observed
both from the extent of coverage of the banking sector
and from the designation of the officers completing
the questionnaire. This soon changed when the banks
realised that the MPC was serious in its analysis of
the questionnaire, pointing out internal contradictions
and hence misleading information. The next major
improvement in coverage arose from the bi-monthly
meetings of the MPC being held in the CBK’s branches.
The branches then undertook to assist in accessing
the business community in Mombasa, Kisumu and
Eldoret.
The major areas of interest obviously were inflation
and economic growth expectations. These two areas
particularly, relate to the MPC’s mandate in managing
inflation and supporting economic growth. At a
secondary level, the health of the Kenyan currency
internationally, as depicted by strengthening or
weakening of the Kenya Shilling against the US dollar,
was also of interest and hence expectations in this area
were also elicited. Clearly, the way in which growth is
enhanced and inflation is controlled arises from
movements in interest rates and private sector credit.
Expectations with respect to these two were also
surveyed.
The survey implicitly was based on a market for private
credit since potential crowding out by government
borrowing was seen to be a threat by the private sector.
It was at this point that the interaction between the
banks, as potential lenders, and the non-bank private
sector firms, as the potential consumers of credit, were
analysed. If both the banks expected to expand lending
and the non-bank private sector to expand borrowing,
then expectations with respect to changes in interest
rates could tell whether the quantitative expectations
were likely to be frustrated or fulfilled.
The eight surveys which have been conducted also
allow the MPC to see in what way perceptions and
expectations have been revised. Initially, in September
2009, most of the banks foresaw a rise in inflation but
by November 2010, the majority had reviewed their
projections. Much the same story can be told with
respect to the non-bank private sector. The growth
expectations story is even more spectacular, 68 percent
of the banks considered a 2-3 percent growth in 2010
Changes in Perceptions of the Economy:
The Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) Market Surveys
Governor adressing press after the Monetary Policy Committee
meeting in January 2011
At a secondary level, the health of the
Kenyan currency internationally, as
depicted by strengthening or
weakening of the Kenya Shilling
against the US dollar, was also of
interest and hence expectations in this
area were also elicited.
MONETARY POLICY

PDFPAGE10
10
CBK Newsletter
Table 1: Changes in Perceptions/Expectations (% of Banks)
 Inflation  Ks h/USD  Exchange  rate  Economic Growth %  
 
Increas e 
by 1-2% 
Remain at 
the same 
level 
Decline 
by 1-2% Str en gthe n Re main   
the  sam e Weaken 2-3 3- 4. 4 4.5-5 5 Abov e 5 
Se p -
200 9  60 24 16 48 28 24 68 24    
Nov-
200 9  33 30 37 45 48 7 56 22    
Ja n- 
201 0  14 45 41 50 32 18  41 59   
Mar-
201 0  15 60 25 50 32 18  40 60   
May-
201 0  16 44 40 24 20 56  24 76   
Ju ly-
201 0  25 62 14 21 28 51  17 69  14 
Sep -
201 0  38 44 18 68 9 23  9 82  9 
Nov - 
201 0  42 46 12 61 33 6  3 12 39 46 
as likely, now, over 80 percent have forcast= a 5
percent growth as most probable.  Once again, the
non-bank private sector has shown the same
expectation. Perhaps not changing their minds, but that
once more information was made available, the
conclusions and expectations changed.
When one looks at the responses with respect to
interest rate expectations, which has been the key
variable of interest to the MPC, the commercial banks
initially expected rates to fall and then as they brought
them down they reported revised expectations that they
would remain stable, suggesting a slower rate of
reduction in the interest rates. These gradual rate
declines, which were noted in both base rates and
lending rates, were associated with an expectation of
an over 10 percent increase in private sector lending.
This coincided more or less with what the private
sector foresaw as their demand.
This bi-monthly survey is a live instrument and the
questionnaire is constantly improving. It has allowed
the MPC to talk to the CEOs of banks and, on the
basis of their own submissions – the forms are now
being filled by very senior bank officials – question
their interest rate spread and exchange rate forecasts.
Table 1 shows that expectations for higher economic
growth in 2010 and a strong exchange rate have been
maintained. Generally, inflation has been expected to
remain low and stable for the remainder of 2010. But
the proportion of respondents who are expecting
inflation to rise has continued its upward trend since
January 2010. Similarly, Table 2 shows that non-bank
private sector firms have maintained their expectations
for higher economic growth, low and stable inflation,
and a strong exchange rate.  A lower proportion
anticipates an increased demand for credit. Overall,
these surveys have enabled the MPC to track the
improvement in confidence in the performance of the
economy.
In conclusion, the one success that the MPC has had
in the market is to coordinate expectations. This has
allowed the market to process information provided
correctly and also to understand this vital subject of
monetary policy, and its transmission mechanism to the
economy.
PDFPAGE11
11
CBK Newsletter
 In fl at i on   Ks h / U S D   E x c h a n g e   
rate   
Econom i c Gr ow th %   Dem and f or Cr edi t  
 
In cr e
as e  b y  
1- 2 %  
Remai
n at 
the  
sam e  
le ve l  
De cl
in e 
by 1-
2%   
St r e
ngt h
en   
Rem
ai n  
th e  
sam e  
We a k
en   
2-
3  
3-
4.4  
4.5-
5  5  Abo v e  
5  
Decli
ne  
Rem
ain   
th e 
sam e  
Inc re
ase by  
1- 10 %  
I ncr ease  
by 10-
20%  
Sep  -
20 0 9  60   24  16  48   28  24  68  24         
N ov-
20 0 9  20   20  60  22   78   90  10         
Ja n -  
20 1 0  18   64  18  30   40  30   73  27    17  17  66   
Ma r -
20 1 0  38   52  10  19   48  33   86  14     33  17  50  
Ma y -
20 1 0  45   18  37  28   43  29  5  53  33   9  15  30  25  30  
Ju l -
20 1 0  28   28  44  26   21  48   17  66   17  7  33  33  27  
Se p -
20 1 0  42   32  26  42   21  32  16  21  63    7  47  46   
N ov-
20 1 0  35   36  29  61   33  6    19  50  31  23  46  23  8  
Table 2: Changes in Perceptions/Expectations (% of Non Bank Private Sector)
The inaugural Monetary Policy Forum was held on
10th August, 2010 at the Kenya School of Monetary
Studies. The Forum, organised by the Central Bank
of Kenya (CBK) and Kenya Bankers Association
(KBA), brought together key stakeholders from the
public sector, media, academia, research institutions,
and financial and real sectors to discuss monetary
policy issues, banking sector developments, financing
of private sector activities and also develop public
awareness on financial services. It also provided a
platform to obtain feedback on the impact of monetary
policy decisions by the Monetary Policy Committee
(MPC) on commercial banks and the real sector. The
theme of the Forum was "Lubricating the Economic
Engine with Adequate and Affordable Credit".
In his opening remarks the Governor, Prof. Njuguna
Ndung'u said such public forums provide important
avenues for bringing together key stakeholders to
discuss how monetary policy affects them, to learn
about banking sector developments and the
First Monetary Policy Forum
opportunities they present. "In addition, he said such
a forum helps in the understanding of how finance
supports private sector activities and sensitizes the
public on the range of financial services".
Stakeholders agreed that in order to achieve the
objectives of the Forum and in view of the current
favourable macroeconomic conditions, and improved
liquidity conditions  following easing of the monetary
policy stance by the MPC, commercial banks should
lower their lending rates further to enhance credit
uptake by the private sector. The high cost of credit
was highlighted by the private sector as a key obstacle
for the sector to contribute fully to the country's growth
target. It was also observed that credit uptake by the
private sector could be enhanced by increasing access
to financial services. Commercial banks were
encouraged to be more transparent by disclosing the
level of bank charges to the public.
click here to read the full report
PDFPAGE12
12
CBK Newsletter
The Kenya Government Bond Program
and Market Development
The on-going construction of Thika Road, Nairobi, funded
by proceeds from the  infrastructure bond.
              Photo by NMG
FINANCIAL MARKETS
Over the years, the Central Bank of Kenya in liaison
with stakeholders in the financial sector has put in place
a number of key initiatives that have seen tremendous
growth of Kenya’s bond market. The Bank has worked
closely with the Market Leaders Forum (MLF), a
consultative group consisting of among others securities
dealers, investment bankers, Treasury, the Central Bank
and the Capital Market Authorities.
To begin with, lengthening of the maturity of securities
in the domestic debt portfolio was the initial task to be
accomplished.  Prior to 2002, government domestic
debt component of public debt consisted mainly of short
term instruments, a source of significant refinancing
risk. In fact, the composition of Treasury bills to bonds
in the portfolio stood at 70:30. This necessitated
formulation of a deliberate policy action to restructure
the portfolio by lengthening the maturity of instruments
thus substantially minimizing refinancing risks
associated with short-term debt and contributing to
development of a vibrant secondary market for bonds.
Certain reforms were introduced to create demand in
long term bonds including the lowering of the cash ratio
for commercial banks to release liquidity thereby
reducing short term interest rates, streamlining the
domestic Borrowing Cash Plan in favour of bonds and
the liberalization of the pension sector.
The process began with the phased introduction of
medium to long term bonds in the market, a step that
saw successful issuance of bonds of up to 15 years
maturity before 2008 and the first 20-year in June 2008.
Indeed, the first 25-yr bond offered to the market in
June 2010 and reopened a month later received very
positive market uptake. In February 2011, the CBK
successfully issued the longest bond in the market, 30
year, dubbed ‘Savings Development Bond’ (SDB). As
a result of this effort, the ratio of Treasury bills to bonds
in the debt portfolio has since reversed from 70:30 in
2001 to 23:77 so far while average maturity of all
securities in the portfolio grew from about 8 months in
2001 to 5 years 4 months by February 2011. This
development is a perfect reflection of market maturity
and successful achievement of the initial objective set
out in the pursuit of bond market development.
 The issuance of medium to long term bonds also
provided the much needed impetus to develop a liquid
bond market and a reliable yield curve, a key
benchmark tool for guiding future issuances of financial
securities as well as pricing other financial products
like corporate bonds, mortgages and commercial loans.
Milestones
Building on the growth of the bond market achieved
from the foregoing, the Central Bank of Kenya together
with the MLF adopted and began the implementation
of benchmark bonds program to improve liquidity at
the secondary market and firm up the yield curve.
Benchmark Bonds are securities characterized by high
credit quality, least default risk, and reasonably large
in volume. They are generally highly liquid, have most
depth i.e. most widely held by various investors, have
the narrowest bid-offer spreads, preferably lowest yield
and therefore carry the potential of active trading in
the secondary market.
Benchmark bonds are bonds against which other
securities or interest rate products are priced or
referenced. Consequently, benchmark issues form the
basis for deriving a benchmark yield curve. The
programme which took off in 2007 began with the
identification and adoption of 2, 5, 10, 15 and 20 year
PDFPAGE13
13
CBK Newsletter
maturities as benchmark tenors for issuance along the
maturity spectrum. The implementation of the
programme entailed issuance of large size bonds of
tenors identified in order to build liquidity and promote
robust secondary market trading. The Bank has
consistently and successfully issued bonds in these
tenors and employed strategies identified in the
programme to ensure build up of liquidity around each
bond issued.
One of the strategies that have received notable market
support since inception in April 2009 is the reopening
of benchmark bonds to increase both the volumes and
the holders for enhanced trading.  Bond reopening
involves increasing the outstanding amount of a
previously issued bond. It involves offering additional
amounts of the same instrument, which bears the same
features of an existing outstanding bond, except for
the issuance date and possibly, the offer price or yield.
About 9 bonds have been reopened so far with all
reopening auctions oversubscribed.
Active secondary bond market is critical for successful
mobilization of domestic resources by government
through borrowing and to investors as an exit
mechanism in accordance with their investment
preferences. Other strategies in the pipeline under the
benchmark bonds programme include but not limited
to conversions, switches/exchanges, consolidations and
potential buy-backs. These strategies are aimed at
eliminating the fragmentation problem in the market
where small illiquid bonds are retired or switched to
benchmark bonds to build liquidity and enhance trading.
Another milestone that has contributed to market growth
to levels seen today is the introduction of new products
aimed at diversifying the range of products from the
conventional treasury securities for market deepening
and development. In FY2008/2009 budget speech, the
Government began to tap into the bond market to finance
infrastructure projects that require huge capital outlay
for long term funding and as a way of promoting public
accountability and transparency on the use of proceeds
from long term project specific bonds.
In February 2009, the government through the CBK
launched the first ever Infrastructure bond (IFB) to
finance key economic and social infrastructure around
the country. This bond was very successful attracting
145% subscription which was a reflection of huge
market buy-in and sense of patriotism by the citizenry
in ownership of the country’s development agenda.
Geothermal energy: One of the projects to benefit from the proceeds of Infrastructure Bond.
PDFPAGE14
14
CBK Newsletter
All other IFBs issued so far were oversubscribed with
the last single issue of Ksh 31bn in August 2010 taken
up at 118% subscription.  In taking this move,
government set a precedent for other public agencies
and private sector to make use of the strength of their
balance sheets and tap into the local capital market to
raise funds to finance their long term projects through
issuance of infrastructure bonds.  The Kenya Electricity
Generating Company (KenGen) was one such entity
that took up the challenge and successfully issued its
first Ksh 25b Public
Infrastructure Bond
(PIBO) in November 2009
which was heavily
oversubscribed.
In recognition of market
maturity as a reflection of
ability to process available
information for price
discovery, the CBK recently started the issuance of
market determined coupon bonds (as opposed to preset
coupon bonds) beginning with maturities up to 10 years.
This move has helped minimize the costs associated
with bonds servicing by government, created an
opportunity for price discovery and promoted market
efficiency.
In diversifying the range of products, the Bank also
introduced the 364-days Treasury bill in August 2009.
This paper has not only added to the range of money
market instruments but also promoted development of
the money market yield curve and as a benchmark for
pricing one year money.
It has attracted great popularity mainly from the
commercial banks. In providing investment products to
the retail sector, the government through the CBK
launched the debut 30-year Savings Development Bond
(SDB) in February 2011 aimed at promoting a savings
culture among the Kenyan population in line with the tenets
of Vision 2030, which was received with a lot of success.
In addition, the bond was a platform for stimulating
personal economic empowerment by providing an
alternative investment instrument that is safe and secure
while delivering solid and dependable returns.
The issuance of the 30-year SDB came at an
opportune time when Kenya had entered into a new
constitutional dispensation which reflects fortifying
public confidence and contribute towards determining
the country’s future growth and economic development.
At the secondary market level, key initiatives
undertaken include the Introduction of Automated
Trading System (ATS) for Treasury bonds in November
2009 that saw increased trading of bonds as a result of
market efficiency and confidence. Transaction cycle
was in effect reduced to T+3. Annual bonds turnover
at the NSE increased
from Ksh 108Bn in 2009
before introduction of
ATS to Ksh 484Bn in
2010, after the
implementation of the
ATS.
Investing in
government
Securities - Central Depository for Government
Securities (CDS) Account a key prerequisite.
It is a requirement that those who wish to invest in
Government Securities open a CDS account at the
Central Bank of Kenya (CBK-CDS) or at its branches
and currency centres. Investors outside Kenya can
open CDS account as nominees through CBK
authorized agents including commercial banks, stock
brokers, investment banks and advisors licensed by the
Capital Markets Authority.
Opening a CBK-CDS account is free of charge.  In
order to invest, investors MUST fill in application forms
for preferred bonds or Treasury bill (available on 
http:/
/www .centralbank.go.ke/securities/
ApplicationForms.aspx) or from the Head office in
Nairobi or branches in Mombasa, Kisumu or Eldoret
or at any the currency centres in Nakuru, Meru and
Nyeri. CBK has also partnered on a pilot basis with
five commercial banks namely Kenya Commercial
Bank, National Bank of Kenya, Equity Bank, Co-
operative Bank of Kenya and Kenya Post Office
Savings Bank to facilitate the opening of CDS accounts
and placing of applications for Treasury bills and bonds.
 Benchmark bonds are bonds 
against which other securities or 
interest rate products are priced 
or referenced.
 
PDFPAGE15
15
CBK Newsletter
What others said about Infractructure Bonds...
“The future is very bright for two
reasons: they enable the
government to raise long-term
funds which will help implement
several projects that are
envisaged in the Vision 2030.
Secondly, it offers savers
attractive interest rates therefore
being an excellent investment opportunity”
.
Mr. James Murigu, Director, Metropol Africa
“Market players actively participated in explaining to
the market, via the media, the rationale for the
infrastructure bonds, demystifying the bond and
technical terms associated with them. This third-party
endorsement by market players was critical in getting
public to buy-in, creating an
anticipatory and positive
sentiment around the issues,
and in keeping the issue firmly
in the public eye”.
John Ngumi,
Investment Banking Director,
CfC Stanbic Bank Ltd.
“Is there investors’ appetite for the
infrastructure bonds? The first
infrastructure bond of Ksh.18.5
billion issued in February 2009 was
oversubscribed by 45 percent
while the second issue of Ksh.18.5
billion in December 2009  was
oversubscribed by 138 percent.  In
March 2010, the  government
issued Ksh.14.5billion. This was oversubscribed by 143
percent. In August 2010, the government offered Ksh.31.6
billion that was oversubscribed by 18 percent. Considering
the significant investor participation in those issues, it is
clear that the infrastructure bond is very popular with
investors and will continue being a preferred investment
avenue”.
Mr Peter Wachira, Senior Investment Manager,
Pinebridge Investments
“By issuing Infrastructure
Bonds, the Government
took the first step in setting
a benchmark for other
issuers to come into the
market. This has created
public awareness on
alternative investment
channels thus deepening the
capital markets. Safaricom
and Kengen issued their
first public Infrastructure Bonds to a resounding
success, an indication of a ready market for the Bonds
and the priority granted to infrastructure by the public.
The Government recognizes that capital markets play
a pivotal role in raising capital through a well developed
bond market to meet increasing demand of
infrastructure development from both the private and
public sectors. Bonds also act as a pricing benchmark
for similar bonds issued by other public and private
sector players. As a way forward, it is expected that
the Bond program will continue with enhanced
participation of more public entities”.
Mr Charles Kairu, Senior Economist
Ministry of  Finance

PDFPAGE16
16
CBK Newsletter
The regulators of the Kenyan financial sector
stepped a level higher to formalize linkages
among them. This includes sharing
information and developing  more effective
approaches of dealing with issues of mutual
interest within the sector. These issues include
supervision of players, registration and
licensing of players, consumer  protection and
compensation, research and capacity building.
Currently, there are five independent sectoral
regulators in the Kenyan financial sector,
namely; the Central Bank of Kenya (CBK)
oversees the banking sector, the Capital
Markets Authority (CMA) supervises the
capital markets, the Retirement Benefits
Financial Sector Regulators
collaborate
Authority (RBA) manages the pensions and
other forms of retirement schemes, the
Insurance Regulatory Authority (IRA) runs
the insurance sector and the newly established
SACCO Societies Regulatory Authority
(SASRA) oversees SACCOs with Front
Office Service Activity (FOSAs)
Need For Collaboration
Though the regulators have previously shared
information and collaborated on a need-to
basis, there was no formal agreement
supporting their collaboration. It is with the
realization that collaboration can assist in the
From L-R: Mr. S. Makove, CEO, IRA; Prof. N. Ndung’u, Governor, CBK; Mr. J. M’Igweta, Chairman, RBA, Mr. M.
Cheserem, the then Chairman, CMA; Mrs. S. Kilonzo, CEO, CMA; Mr. E. Odundo, CEO, RBA and Mr. S. Mainda,
Chairman, IRA, respond to journalists after signing the Memorandum of Understanding on 31st August, 2009.
PDFPAGE17
17
CBK Newsletter
effective performance of their respective
duties of promoting a safe, sound  and stable
financial system that CMA, CBK, IRA and
the RBA entered into a Memorandum of
Understanding (MOU) on 31st August 2009.
Further, the response for continued
convergence among the players in the
financial sector became inevitable with the
recognition that risks emanating from either
of the sub-sectors has the potential to affect
the safety, soundness and stability of the
entire financial sector.
In addition, the importance of collaboration
between financial sector regulators was
Since the signing of the MOU, the financial sector
regulators have realized some key achievements.
These include secondments and attachment of staff
amongst the regulators for knowledge exchange
and capacity building; amendment of the respective
legal frameworks to support the collaboration;
harmonization of financial sector licenses to expire
on 31st December of each year and joint
participation at the Eldoret, Kisumu, Mombasa and
Nairobi Agricultural Society of Kenya (ASK)
Shows.
All the regulators have since joined the Financial
Education and Consumer Protection (FEP)
spearheaded by the Financial Sector Deepening
Trust (FSD) Kenya with the ultimate aim of
developing a National Strategy on financial
education for Kenya; The regulators hold semi-
annual Joint Board of Directors Retreats during
which the directors of the four regulators review
progress in the collaboration efforts and decide
on their action plan.
A glimpse of the financial regulators ‘village’ during the
joint participation at the Nairobi International Trade Fair.
Achievements
“Individual commitment to a group
effort - that is what makes a team
work, a company work, a society
work, a civilization work”.
Vincent Lombardi
reinforced by the recent global financial crisis
which was partly blamed on loose regulation
of players heavily involved in financial
innovation and having cross sector operations.
The MOU formed the basis of strengthening
the financial sector regulators’ collaboration
in the cross-sector supervision of financial
institutions and cooperation in other matters
of mutual interest. Currently, plans are
underway for SASRA to be a signatory to
the MOU.
PDFPAGE18
18
CBK Newsletter
The morning of 27th August 2010 ushered in a new
dawn for Kenya. At exactly 10.27 a.m., thousands of
Kenyans gathered to witness the promulgation of a
new Constitution. Kenyans had earlier approved the
Instruments of Promulgation through a peaceful
Referendum held on 4th August 2010.
With the thousands in attendance looking on, President
Mwai Kibaki signed the Instruments of Promulgation
and declared Kenya’s new Constitution operational.
So what is new for the Central Bank?
The New Constitution has brought with it a number of
positive elements for the Central Bank, as contained
in Article 231 of the new law.
Perhaps the most prominent provision for the Bank is
that the new supreme law has re-established the Bank
as a constitutional institution. This is significant
because it has created a new sense of perpetuity for
the Bank, given that constitutional bodies are not easy
to decimate. The provision has also underscored the
premier status of the Bank as a national institution.
The new Constitution has emphasized on the
independence of the Bank. The new independence is
laudable as international best practice favours full
independence of Central Banks.
The new Constitution has further restated  the core
functions of the Bank thereby insulating the Bank from
the risk of political interference. This is unlike before,
when the functions were only placed in an Act of
Parliament that is easy to amend.
Another major development in the new Constitution
relates to the features of currency notes and coins.
Going forward, the new law allows currency notes
and coins to bear images that depict Kenya or an
aspect of Kenya but not the image of any individual.
Your wallets will therefore soon host refreshed visitors
featuring natural and man-made symbols of the nation
but steering clear of human images.
In effect, the new Constitution has placed the Central
Bank on an elevated pedestal that can only serve to
enhance attainment of its statutory mandate and in
turn spur economic development in the country.
Central Bank and the New Constitution
The President declaring Kenya’s New Constitution Photo by PPS
WHAT’S NEW?
PDFPAGE19
19
CBK Newsletter
The Kenyan currency has a long history.
In Africa and the rest of the world, in the olden days,
trade was carried out by a barter system. This was
considered a reasonably efficient method when mostly
basic necessities were exchanged. Goats or sheep,
for example, were exchanged for grain or in the case
of people from Ukambani who exchanged honey for
food grown in the highlands of Mt. Kenya. Thriving
of the barter system of trade was predominantly
dependant on the availability of goods for goods.
The system later developed to the  use of cowrie shells
and beads. Cowrie shells were rare ornAamental
artefacts and therefore formed a sustainable quality
product for exchange. The same case applies to the
beads which were greatly desired among the Kenyan
communities.
The entry of what is commonly considered as real
currency in Kenya can be traced back to 1800 - 1850
when the Maria Theresa Thalers were introduced in
the Kenyan coast. The Thalers were famous silver
coins used around the world in the 18th and 19th
Century and used by Indian, Greek and European
merchants at the Eritrean and Kenyan coasts. The
first Thalers were minted around 1741 and named
Thalers after the beautiful Empress Maria Theresa
who ruled Austria, Bohemia and Hungary (Austrian
Empire) from 1740 to 1780. The Thaler was the most
popular and only acceptable silver currency among
the Arabs.
Despite the Thaler’s popularity in the East African
Coast, it was not able to penetrate upcountry and the
Indian Rupee was used for payment of Indian workers
during the building of the Kenya-Uganda railway in
1896 and managed to move inwards becoming
acceptable by the African population who in various
mother tongues called it different names such as
“Rupia” or “Pesa”.
The Indian Rupee was abolished after Kenya became
a crown colony in 1920 when the Imperial British
East Africa’s (IBEA) mandate was terminated.
The East African Currency Board (EACB) was then
established to oversee the issuance of currency in the
region, which saw the introduction of the East African
Florins.
Some of the items used in barter trade
1905 Five Rupees
1850 Maria Theresa Thaler
Evolution of the Kenyan Currency
PDFPAGE20
20
CBK Newsletter
1920 One Florin Coin
In January 1922, the shilling equivalent was introduced
in all the three East African countries and by June
1923, the shilling was firmly established as official
currency in Kenya, Uganda and the then Tanganyika.
Kenya began printing and minting its own currency in
1966 under the mandate given to the Central Bank of
Kenya that was established in the same year.
1921 EACB 100 Shilling Note
The initial issue of Kenya shilling notes were in the
denominations of 5, 10, 20, 50 and 100 shillings, all
bearing the portrait of the First President of Kenya,
H.E. Mzee Jomo Kenyatta in the front, and diverse
scenes of economic activities in Kenya at the back.
First Kenyan banknotes
In 1979, following the death of H.E. Mzee Jomo
Kenyatta and the subsequent inauguration of H.E
Daniel Toroitich Arap Moi as the second President
of the Republic of Kenya, new notes and coins with
new security features were issued to commemorate
the events and usher in a new era by including the
President’s portrait.
The new Constitution Section 231(4) requires that
notes and coins may bear images that depict Kenya
or an aspect of Kenya but should not bear the image
of any individual. Central Bank will therefore in the
near future be expected to replace the current
generation of notes and coins with new currency
bearing these new features. And, given the intricate
process of amending the Constitution, we can be
assured that these features will be with us for
generations to come.
“Everyday do something that
will inch you closer to a
better tomorrow”.
Doug Firebaugh
PDFPAGE21
21
CBK Newsletter
ECONOMICS MADE EASY
What is inflation?
Mention the word inflation and
there are as diverse mental
impressions of what it is as the
number of  people in the audience.
It is therefore worthwhile
presenting, for public
understanding, financial and
economic subjects in simple terms
in order to converge public
understanding of this topic.
Inflation is the continued (or
sustained) general increase in the
prices of items and services that the
people of a given country use over
a given period of time e.g when the
price of maize flour which was
originally costing Ksh.54 increases
to Ksh.70.
Inflation occurs when financial
and economic changes, actual or
expected, cause the demand for
goods and services to go above
the existing supply at existing
prices.  It also occurs when supply
falls below demand for goods and
services e.g when there is demand
for sugar yet the supply is low.
What influences inflation?
In Kenya, inflation is mainly
influenced by changes in food
supply, petroleum and other fuels,
transport and communications.
Changes in the general price level
are influenced by the amount of
goods and services available and
the amount of money in the
economy. Other factors that affect
inflation include: drought, floods,
wars, crop diseases, political
upheavals, or other unique events
take place.
CBK has an inflation target of 5
percent plus  or minus 2 points.
Overall month on month inflation
was 5.4 percent as at January 2011.
This indicates that Kenya is within
the inflation target.
Government agencies conduct
household surveys to identify a
basket of commonly used consumer
goods and services and track, over
time, the prices of these items. A
common price for all baskets is
derived and it is referred to as the
Consumer Price Index (CPI).
How does this affect the
consumer?
Even though inflation sometimes
leads to short-term gains, inflation
eventually disrupts normal
economic activities.  When prices
of the goods and services that we
buy increase, our ability to buy them
is reduced and we can only buy
fewer of the same.  This forces
people of lower income to use less
quantity or substitute with poor
quality food items or adjust their
budgets accordingly.  This may
affect their nutrition and health
status, such that their labor
productivity is reduced.
High inflation also affects those
who earn fixed incomes such as
pensioners.  A parent will keep a
close observation on the changes
in fees in schools where his/her
children attend. Likewise, high
inflation limits investments by
businesses and can also limit
employment of labor.  Investors
track inflation in order to know
where to invest their wealth. Policy
makers and economists track
inflation to decide how to manage
or change economic policy or
strategies. Quite often, during
periods of high inflation, business
spending decreases, consumer
spending decreases and stock and
bond prices usually depress rapidly.
 Inflation is controlled mostly by
central banks which control the
availability and cost of credit. The
volume of money in circulation
influences the cost of money
(interest rates). A central bank
would track inflation in order to
decide whether to make more
money available to the public, by
making it more affordable, or to
make less money available, by
making it more expensive.  By
making these adjustments
inflationary pressures are partially
offset. A central bank controls the
amount of money in circulation to
match the expected economic
growth.  Control of money in
circulation to influence price levels
is called ‘Monetary policy’. For
these reasons, we need to have
low, stable and predictable inflation
levels to support economic growth.
High inflation adversely impacts the price of basic foodstuffs
PDFPAGE22
22
CBK Newsletter
“The Central Bank of Kenya is optimistic that
the financial inclusion gap will be significantly
narrowed, through usage of DTMs bringing
Kenya closer to achieving the Vision 2030
objective of economic growth, development
and financial stability.
The Central Bank reiterates
its commitment to the development of an all
inclusive financial system to serve
a majority of the Kenyan
populace and remains ardent
in formulating policies that support innovation in
the financial sector”.
Central Bank Governor, Prof. Njuguna Ndung’u
After Licensing The Fifth Deposit Taking
Microfinance (DTM)  Institution
– Remu DTM Limited
Word for word
“We, Leaders of the G20, are united in our
conviction that by working together we can
secure a more prosperous future for the
citizens of all countries. Today, the Seoul
Summit delivers: the Seoul Action Plan
composed of comprehensive, cooperative and
country-specific policy actions. The Plan
includes our commitment to: The Financial
Inclusion Action
Plan, the Global Partnership for Financial
Inclusion
and a flexible SME Finance Framework, all of
which will significantly contribute to improving
access to financial services and expanding
opportunities for poor
 households and small and medium
enterprises”.
The G20 Seoul Summit Leaders’ Declaration
November 11-12, 2010
Upcoming events
Business Community Visits
The Central Bank of Kenya (CBK), Kenya Bankers Association (KBA) and the Kenya Credit Information
Sharing Initiative (KCISI) will jointly undertake sensitization forums (Business Community Visits) in Kisumu,
Eldoret and Mombasa in February and March 2011. The visits are aimed at sensitizing the customers and
staff in these towns, and the general public on the benefits of credit information sharing including full file
reporting.
Housing Finance Course by Wharton School
A Housing Finance course targeted at Sub-Saharan Africa will be held at Kenya School of Monetary
Studies (KSMS) in 11-15th April, 2011. The course will be run by the Wharton School which is part of the
University of Pennsylvania.
“Together with the central bank we are
working on a process of financial inclusion by
mainstreaming into the formal sector some
people who are actively engaged in the
informal sector. This will allow us to capture a
lot of people who are not being included in the
formal statistics that we are currently using.”
Finance Minister, Uhuru Kenyatta At African
Finance Ministers News Conference During IMF-
World Bank Annual Meetings
“Get to know counterparts in other countries so
that it will open up and expedite communication
channels that, in turn, will help you learn from each
others’ experiences in the march toward greater
financial inclusion”.
Alfred Hanning, Executive Director, AFI in his
opening remarks during the The 2010 AFI Global
Policy Forum
*************
*************
*************