PDFPAGE1

PDFPAGE2
60th Anniversary
Commemorative Volume
of  the
Central Bank of  Sri Lanka
1950 - 2010
PDFPAGE3
The views presented in these papers are those 
of the authors and do not necessarily indicate 
the views of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka.
60th Anniversary Commemorative V olume of the 
Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950-2010
2011
ISBN 978-955-575-247-3
Printer : Central Bank of Sri Lanka Printing Press
  No. 58, Sri Jayewardenepura Mawatha
  Rajagiriya
  Sri Lanka
Publisher: Central Bank of Sri Lanka
  No. 30, Janadhipathi Mawatha
  Colombo 1
  Sri Lanka
PDFPAGE4
iii
Contents
Message from the Governor
Preface by the Chief Economist and Director of Economic Research
 1. The Long March of the Central Bank – 60 Years of Central Banking in Sri Lanka 1
 2. Rising from the Ashes – The Central Bank’s Remarkable Recovery from the  
        Terrorist Attack 17
 3. Stability in the Midst of Uncertainty 25
 4. Evolution of the Conduct of Monetary Policy in Sri Lanka 37
 5. The Role of the Watchdog – Strengthening Financial Regulation in Sri Lanka 47
 6. Surviving in White Waters – Stabilising Domestic Financial Markets 57
 7. Determining the Exchange Rate – Exchange Rate Regimes in Sri Lanka 69
 8. Payments and Settlements – Evolution of Sri Lanka’s Payment System 79
 9. Currency issued by the Central Bank of Sri Lanka 89
 10. Foreign Exchange Transactions – From Controls to Relaxation 105
 11. Managing Sri Lanka’s Foreign Reserves 113
 12. Changing Lanes – Pursuing a Liberalised Economic Policy 125
 13. Sri Lanka’s External Trade Relations 133
 14. Expanding Horizons – Integration with the World Economy 141
 15. Managing the Public Debt 151
 16. Sri Lanka Steps into International Capital Markets 159
 17. Consumer Finance Surveys Conducted Since 1953 – What the Data Reveal 165
 18. Providing Social Security through Employees’ Provident Fund 179
 19. Special Attention to Special Needs – Central Bank Focuses on Regional 
  Development 191 
 20. Renaissance of the North and the East 205
 21. Recent Trends in the Emerging Economy of Sri Lanka 215
PDFPAGE5
iv 
PDFPAGE6
v
The 60 th Anniversary of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka is celebrated at a historic time, both 
nationally and internationally. Nationally, because we are at a time of growth and stability, the 
founding pillars of economic prosperity. Internationally, because the founding pillars of the 
world economic system such as free markets and credit systems have been shaken by history’s 
worst global financial crisis with the central banks across the world being seriously challenged to 
maintain stability.
Over the past 60 years, the Central Bank of Sri Lanka has consistently endeavoured to 
ensure macroeconomic stability, and function as an institution that is sensitive to the needs of the 
people. The Bank has also taken the necessary steps over this period as the authority on monetary 
management and the regulator of the financial system to achieve price stability and financial 
system stability and thereby contribute to the prosperity of Sri Lanka. At the same time,  the Bank 
has facilitated the expansion of the financial system and helped improve financial inclusiveness. 
Significant improvements have also been effected in many other aspects of Bank’s activities, 
such as currency management, foreign exchange management, public debt management and the 
management of the Employees’ Provident Fund.  
This publication effectively captures the challenges faced, trials endured and silent 
victories recorded by the Central Bank of Sri Lanka in this long and exciting journey, while also 
documenting important events and developments in the different aspects of the economy. I am 
confident that this compilation would provide an informative account of the past sixty years of the 
Sri Lankan economy and the Central Bank of Sri Lanka.
Ajith Nivard Cabraal
Governor
August 2011
Message from the Governor 
Central Bank of Sri Lanka

PDFPAGE7
vi 
PDFPAGE8
vii
The Central Bank of Sri Lanka as well as Sri Lanka’s economy has both seen rapid changes over 
the last sixty years. In a fast developing world, it is essential that we stay abreast of the new 
developments to reap maximum benefits for the country and safeguard it from the possible per il 
that could befall us. Over the past sixty years, the Central Bank of Sri Lanka has continued to be 
a dynamic institution, which guided Sri Lanka’s economy with skill and competence, to the brink 
of emerging as a rapidly developing economy in South Asia, where it stands today. 
This publication, issued in commemoration of the 60th year of establishment of the Central 
Bank, presents a collection of 20 articles on the evolution of the Central Bank as well as its lasting 
contribution in numerous fields to the socio-economic development of Sri Lanka. 
The Long March of the Central Bank – 60 Years of Central Banking in Sri Lanka  takes 
you through the evolution of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka since its establishment in 1950, 
touching on the key events that changed the course of central banking in the country. In January 
1996 the Central Bank of Sri Lanka faced a test of strength only a few other institutions in the 
world have undergone…and even fewer have successfully overcome. Rising from the Ashes – 
The Central Bank’s Remarkable Recovery from the Terrorist Attack is a narrative of the Bank’s 
experience of recovery and determination to rise to greater heights. 
One of the toughest challenges faced by any central bank is to ensure stability in the 
economy. Stability in the Midst of Uncertainty  recounts the episodes of turbulence faced by the 
Sri Lankan economy and the measures taken by the Central Bank to bring about stability. 
The conduct of monetary policy is the exclusive prerogative of a central bank to ensure 
price stability in a country. Evolution of the Conduct of Monetary Policy in Sri Lanka  presents 
the various aspects of the conduct of monetary policy in Sri Lanka and the progressive measures 
taken by the Central Bank to enhance its effectiveness over the years.  
The Central Bank is also entrusted with the task of maintaining stability in the domestic 
financial system. The Role of the Watchdog – Strengthening Financial Regulation in Sri 
Lanka is an account of the continuous modifications carried out in the approach to regulate the 
financial system of the country in a bid to keep abreast of the ongoing changes both lo cally and 
internationally. 
Preface by the Chief Economist and 
Director of Economic Research
PDFPAGE9
viii 
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
Efforts taken by the Central Bank to stabilise the domestic financial markets since its 
inception and the lessons learnt in the process are captured in Surviving in White Waters – 
Stabilising Domestic Financial Markets.
Determining the Exchange Rate – Exchange Rate Regimes in Sri Lanka  traces the 
various exchange rate regimes adopted from time to time by Sri Lanka to suit the macroeconomic 
environment and outlook at the time. 
The Central Bank of Sri Lanka has played the lead role in introducing innovative systems 
to modernise the payments and settlements system of the country over the years to augment the 
effectiveness of the country’s financial system. Such initiatives by the Central Bank are presented 
in Payments and Settlement – Evolution of Sri Lanka’s Payments System.  
Notes and coins used in Sri Lanka have an interesting history behind each of them. 
Currency Issued by the Central Bank of Sri Lanka  reveals many interesting details about each 
of the currency series issued by the Central Bank, up to the latest series issued in 2011, as well 
as a historical account of the minting process, which would be particularly invaluable to the 
numismatists in Sri Lanka. 
Economic development of the country brought about a greater inflow of foreign ex change, 
raising the foreign exchange reserves to unprecedented heights in recent years. The enhanced 
stability in the external front thus established enabled a change in Sri Lanka’s foreign exchange 
regulations from a period of rigid controls to a more relaxed position while management of 
the reserves also proved to be more challenging.  From Control to Facilitation – Exchange 
Control Liberalisation gives the sequenced liberalisation implemented by the Central Bank while 
Managing Sri Lanka’s Foreign Reserves presents the challenges faced by the Bank in managing 
the country’s growing reserves. 
Changing Lanes – Pursuing a Liberalised Economic Policy  is a brief account of Sri 
Lanka’s experiences in moving towards economic liberalisation. Sri Lanka’s External Trade 
Relations presents the various approaches to international trade during the episodes of outward 
looking and inward looking policies pursued over the last 60 years. The gradual opening up of Sri 
Lanka’s economy and our broadened inter-linkages with the world in terms of both trade as well 
as capital and financial flows are presented in Expanding Horizons – Integration with the World 
Economy. 
Managing the Public Debt  gives an account of the steps taken by the Central Bank, 
categorised by instrument, to efficiently and effectively manage the public debt of the country,  
which is an agency function entrusted to the Central Bank. In 2007 Sri Lanka took a decisive 
step in public debt management by issuing its debut sovereign international bond. Encouraged 
by the reception for the Bond, several other issues followed in 2009-2011. Sri Lanka Steps into 
International Capital Markets is an account of the country’s experience of tapping international 
investors. 
PDFPAGE10
ix
Central banks rely on a host of information to design policy measures and gauge their 
effectiveness. The needs are more pronounced for the central banks of developing countries as 
a broad range of socio-economic data are required to facilitate their policy formulation. The 
Consumer Finances Survey is a longstanding survey conducted by the Central Bank of Sri Lanka 
to fill in this lacuna. Consumer Finances Surveys Conducted since 1953 – What the Data Reveal 
is the statistical embodiment of Sri Lanka’s growth story.
Special Attention to Special Needs – Central Bank Focuses on Regional Development  
is an overview of the Central Bank’s efforts at promoting financial deepening amongst the ru ral 
masses in a bid to promote economic growth. Although this is a step away from the conventional 
operations of a central bank, the efforts have yielded commendable results. 
The prospects for development of the North and the East were hampered for decades by 
the protracted civil conflict, which underscored the urgency of restoring normalcy in the region 
following the resolution of the conflict. Renaissance of the North and the East  reviews the 
measures taken by the government to revitalise the North and the East and the catalytic role played 
by the Central Bank to fast track the process. In conclusion, it presents the challenges faced by 
the authorities in uplifting livelihoods in these areas and ensuring sustainability.
The Central Bank has also been entrusted with managing the EPF, the country’s largest 
provident fund, owned by nearly 13.3 million persons employed in the private and semi-
government sectors. Providing Social Security through the Employees’ Provident Fund  gives 
a description of the Central Bank’s dedicated efforts of prudently managing the Fund to ensure 
maximum retirement benefits as well as other benefits for the betterment of its members. 
Sri Lanka’s economy showed substantial changes since the end to the three decade 
long conflict in mid-2009. The ensuing period was characterised by greater stability in the 
macroeconomy, repositioning Sri Lanka on a path to attaining high growth. Recent Trends in the  
Emerging Economy of Sri Lanka  presents the changes undergone by the economy since 2009, 
touching on the near term prospects for the country.  
I thank the Governor and the staff of the Central Bank for their good wishes and support. 
I would also like to thank the staff of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka who contributed to this 
publication by sharing their expertise with much enthusiasm and eloquence in the chosen subject 
areas. I am sincerely grateful to Dr. D. S. Wijesinghe, former Deputy Governor of the Central 
Bank of Sri Lanka and Dr. Koshy Mathai, Resident Representative of the International Monetary 
Fund in Sri Lanka for reviewing all articles presented for publication. A committee comprising 
Mrs. Swarna Gunaratne, Dr. Chandranath Amarasekara, Ms. Cheika Hewagama, Mrs. Anandika 
Hettiarachchi, Ms. Bhagya Senaratne, Mr. Waruna Wickumsiri and Mr. Chathura Kulawardena 
co-ordinated the preparation of the final draft. An editorial committee composed of Ms. Cheika 
Hewagama, Ms. Kanchana Ambagahawita, Mr. Navin Perera (Economic Research Department), 
PDFPAGE11
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
x 
Mr. Yohan Samaratunga (Public Debt Department), Ms. Prasangi Dayaratne (Information 
Technology Department), and Ms Sumudu Gunasekare (International Operations Department), 
assisted in the preparation of the final draft. Mr. D.D.M. Waidyasekera, President of Sri L anka 
Institute of Taxation, also provided useful editorial suggestions. Special thanks are due to the 
Director and staff of Communications Department for assisting in the publication. Mr. Darshana 
Narampanawa (Central Bank Printing Press) designed the publication, cover design was prepared 
by Mr. Kasun Priyashantha (Communications Department) while Mr. Rohana Liyanapathirana 
(Communications Department) provided the photographs. Mr. Vajira Karunatillake, Manager, 
Central Bank of Sri Lanka Printing Press and his staff executed the task of printing. 
K D Ranasinghe 
Chief Economist and Director
Economic Research Department
August 2011
PDFPAGE12
1
The day 28 August 1950, marked the dawn of a new era in the economic and social development 
history of Sri Lanka. The year witnessed the birth of a great institution called the Central Bank 
of Ceylon 1 with the strong expectation that it would contribute to the prosperity of the country 
and raise the welfare of the people. Immediately after independence, the political leadership 
realised that uplifting the economic status of the country and its people should go hand in hand 
with economic independence and the Central Bank was set up to establish financial autonomy. 
This was a ray of hope for Ceylonese people who were grappling with low per capita income, 
high level of absolute poverty and rising unemployment. The Central Bank of Sri Lanka (CBSL) 
was statutorily empowered under the Monetary Law Act No.58 of 1949, equipped with all the 
necessary instruments to manage financial conditions of the country and was expected to bring 
prosperity primarily by maintaining stability both in prices and the financial system. 
In 2010, the CBSL completed 60 years of its service to the nation. Its journey of six decades 
has been highly challenging but rewarding with many fulfilling outcomes. Political developments, 
technological advancement and developments in economic theory and practice caused the role 
of the CBSL to evolve and mature. There were also several important lessons learnt. The CBSL 
experienced some of the great ups and downs of the Sri Lankan economy while grappling with 
episodes of economic turbulences, global shocks, domestic shocks, civil war, terrorist attacks 
The Long March of the Central Bank-
60 Years of Central Banking in Sri Lanka
Mrs. C. Premaratne
Assistant Governor
1 The name ‘Central Bank of Ceylon’ was changed to ‘Central Bank of Sri Lanka’ on 31 December 1985.
1
PDFPAGE13
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
2
and natural disasters. During these six decades, Sri Lanka has experienced a modest average 
annual growth of 4.4 per cent and an annual inflation rate of 8 per cent. By end  2010, average 
inflation stood at 5.9 per cent and the country was moving towards a high growth trajecto ry. 
Reflecting the strong potential of the economy subsequent to the ending of the internal conflict,  
the Sri Lankan economy recorded an impressive growth of 8 per cent in 2010. Per capita income 
of the country reached a level of US dollars 2,399 in 2010 compared with US dollars 120 in 
1950 promoting Sri Lanka into the middle income category. Living standards have improved 
considerably with the poverty headcount ratio reducing to 8.9 per cent and the unemployment 
rate decling to 4.2 per cent. The CBSL played a pivotal role and led the economy in achieving all 
these impressive outcomes by creating right monetary conditions conducive for people to create 
more wealth, maintaining a robust financial system, building and developing financial and debt 
securities markets, managing volatilities in money and exchange markets and adopting latest  
technology and best international practices in the financial spectrum. In fact, throughout the 
period, the CBSL maintained its credibility and earned public respect through its admirable record 
of work. 
Commissioning of Central Bank of Ceylon
Looking back at the time of the establishment of the CBSL, the country remained predominantly 
rural and peasant agriculture was the main source of employment. The financial system was 
rudimentary and fragmented. At independence, all monetary matters in Sri Lanka were handled by 
a Currency Board system. Under this system money supply had an automatic link with the foreign 
exchange earnings; the amount of currency issued expanded when the balance of payments of 
the country was in surplus and contracted when it was in deficit. Hence, though it provided an 
automatic adjustment to balance of payments, the Currency Board mechanism did not have 
the flexibility required by the authorities to accommodate the growing needs of the expanding 
economy. 
Considering all the above and also influenced by the intended setting up of central banks in  
Korea and the Philippines, the first finance minister of independent Ceylon, Mr. J. R. Jayawardena 
requested assistance from the Federal Reserve Bank, USA to set up a Reserve Bank in Ceylon in 
1948. In response, Mr. John Exter, an eminent economist of the Federal Reserve Bank,  USA who 
had been associated with establishment of central banks in Korea and Phillipines was sent to the 
country. He was requested to frame proposals for a draft constitution for the Reserve Bank  for 
Ceylon. The Monetary Law bill, prepared on the basis of the recommendations made by Joh n 
Exter, through his report known as the “Exter Report” was presented to the Parliament in 1 949. 
Diverse views were expressed by the House of Representatives. Overall, the Exter Report was 
greatly admired considering its clarity, directness, succinctness and sustained relevance to the 
subject matter. Some however, were doubtful about the effectiveness of the Central Bank and 
some House Representatives enunciated that “Minister of Finance is in danger of putting too great 
value or overestimating its function as it is not equipped with the required other infrastructure and 
PDFPAGE14
3
The Long March of the Central Bank – 60 Years of Central Banking in Sri Lanka
institutional setup”. In contrast, several members stated that “it was much more important than 
even the Independence bill”. Amidst all these, the “Central Bank of Ceylon” was established in 
1950. 
John Exter, as the first Governor of the Central Bank of Ceylon clearly spelt out the 
rationale for the establishment of the CBSL. He strongly emphasised that the Central Bank is a 
necessary condition for future prosperity and the Bank’s contribution must necessarily be a long 
run contribution. Further, he explained that the Bank does not itself produce goods and services, 
and it cannot directly get involved in economic activities. The Central Bank’s only weapon is 
to print money (fiat money) or create credit. Hence, the prime responsibility of the Bank is to  
create the right monetary conditions for maintaining price stability or creating an inflation free 
environment conducive for people to take a medium to long term view and create more wealth. 
In a stable monetary environment, which is conducive to create real wealth, the task of the 
government and the private sector is to take appropriate measures for the same. The CBSL was 
also empowered to examine and supervise commercial banks in order to strengthen the banking 
system, which would in turn enhance flow of credit promoting expansion of economic activities. 
John Exter believed that such powers will prevent banks from engaging in unsound p ractices and 
protect the depositors from bank failures. Meanwhile, Exter also believed that the CBSL could 
support efficient handling of public finances by acting as the government’s fiscal agent, banker  
and financial adviser. Since the CBSL was regarded as the most trustworthy and capable agent of 
the government, somewhat non central banking functions were also assigned to the Bank both at 
the time of establishment and later on. Among those were the implementation of exchange control 
regulations, management of the Employee’s Provident Fund, public debt management, financial 
intelligence unit (FIU), etc. On the whole, as stipulated in the Monetary Law Act, the Bank was 
expected to maintain monetary stability, preserve both internal and external value of the rupee 
and to initiate actions for promoting growth and employment and full development of resources 
within the Sri Lankan economy. In fact, the tasks assigned to the newly established Bank were 
extremely challenging, as such targets were not necessarily seen compatible and harmonious at 
all times.
Role of the CBSL in Managing the Economy
Monetary Policy in the Early Era
When the Bank started business in 1950, the economy was favourably placed with an external 
assets portfolio sufficient to finance 12 months of imports, surpluses in the trade account, the 
current account, and the overall balance of the balance of payments (BOP) and the budget 
deficit and debt containing at around 4 per cent and 16 per cent of the gross domestic product 
(GDP), respectively. Fixed exchange rate system was maintained and the Sri Lankan Rupee was 
pegged to the Sterling Pound. The challenge ahead was to achieve high growth while maintaining 
stability in the domestic economy. The first challenge the Bank had to face was the Korean boom, 
which threatened the Sri Lankan economy in several ways. The sharp rise in export prices in 
PDFPAGE15
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
4
1949 and 1950 in the context of the Korean war resulted in large balance of payments surpluses 
requiring the Bank to sterilise the expansionary impact of higher export proceeds to avert 
inflationary pressures. The CBSL used conventional monetary measures such as raising SRR on 
demand deposits, credit controls and to a limited scale, open market operations. The efforts were 
reinforced by adopting unconventional policy measures, and commercial banks were allowed to 
invest their foreign exchange working balances abroad so that the monetisation of proceeds were 
postponed until the domestic economic situation was free of a threat to stability. Despite these 
efforts to contain the expansion in aggregate demand, external assets declined by 43 per cent in 
1953 due to the fall in export income, adverse terms of trade and increased level of imports. The 
creation of huge domestic purchasing power through expansionary fiscal deficits funded by  the 
Central Bank, high consumption expenditure of the government and reluctance of the people to 
get readjusted to a normal expenditure pattern even after the boom subsided were the key reasons 
for the deterioration in the external position. The situation was relieved to a certain extent with 
the tea boom, which occurred in 1954, improving government finances and generating budget 
surpluses in 1954 and 1955. The CBSL issued its own securities for the first time in 1956  to mop 
up excess liquidity. 
In the next few years, the Bank had to face a serious challenge posed by the expansionary 
fiscal policies associated mainly with large food subsidies, the deficits arising from which were 
mainly financed by the banking sector. The budget surplus enjoyed in 1955 turned  out to be a 
deficit by next year and it rose up to 6 per cent of GDP by 1959. The Bank p ointed out the danger 
of inflationary financing and repeatedly advised the government to curtail excessive subsidies on 
consumption, which led to large budget deficits. The CBSL finally took a bold decision in 1959 to 
raise the Bank rate to reflect true cost of borrowing in the wake of escalating budget deficits and 
deteriorating BOP situation, despite differences of opinion between the Ministry of Finance and 
the Monetary Board. By the end of the decade, the Korean war surplus, which was sufficient to 
finance about 12 months of import requirement of the country dwindled away creating a sev ere 
BOP crisis mainly due to the sharp increase in import expenditure. Nevertheless, the country 
remained committed to its fixed exchange rate arrangements and monetary policy measures were 
not strong enough to arrest the situation. The effectiveness of monetary policy measures during 
the first 10 years was impeded by the continuous reliance on expansionary fiscal policies and 
the government pressure to maintain a low interest rate policy as evidenced by the directives 
issued in 1959 by the government to reduce the Bank rate revoking the decision of the Monetary 
Board. In a nutshell, Sri Lanka lost a valuable opportunity, which could have laid a foundation for 
sustainable growth by an appropriate interest rate policy in coordination with a set of appropriate 
fiscal and exchange rate policies. 
Monetary Policy in a Controlled Regime
In the next 17 years, macroeconomic management was severely threatened by two key factors 
i.e., (a) worsening balance of payments situation resulting mainly from low growth in exports 
and failure to diversify the export structure and (b) high fiscal deficits associated with increasing  
PDFPAGE16
5
The Long March of the Central Bank – 60 Years of Central Banking in Sri Lanka
subsidies on food, health and education, which were financed by the banking sector. The  
key set of policy measures adopted by the government in this environment was strict  
exchange controls, import substitution, reliance on the domestic sector and gradual  
expansion in the size of the public sector. In keeping with the government policies, the focus of 
monetary policy had to be placed both on stability and development objectives. This made the 
task of the CBSL more difficult as the two objectives conflicted with each other. Throughout 
the period, the Bank had to make concerted efforts to deal with severe BOP crises that resulted 
in a sharp fall in external assets while financing escalating fiscal deficits associated with 
increasing subsidies, which in turn affected the BOP. In the meantime, the CBSL, with a view 
to achieving the development objective had to provide subsidised credit to priority areas through 
refinances, thereby building such concessionary credit schemes permanently into the monetary 
policy structure. Strict exchange controls and low production created a scarcity of goods while 
inflationary financing of fiscal deficit and concessionary refinance schemes added fuel to inflation. 
Throughout the period, the budget deficit remained at 5-6 per cent level but sprang to 8 per cent 
by 1976. 
The Bank adopted a restrictive monetary policy stance with some concessions throughout 
the period and a conducive environment for market oriented monetary management did not exist. 
Thus interest rates were not effective as an instrument of monetary policy and the CBSL had to 
depend largely on direct control measures such as credit controls and credit ceilings including 
imposing credit controls on non essential imports. Throughout the period, the Bank was very 
critical of the policies of the government of that time and the measures implemented to the 
detriment of the country and its people. In a nutshell, the CBSL found it difficult to o perate 
effectively in a highly controlled restrictive and regulated economy. The monetary policy adopted 
during this era was a mixture of concessions, subsidies and controls giving short term solutions 
to emerging macroeconomic problems. The outcomes were a continuous expansion in the money 
supply, which reached to 34 per cent by 1976, the highest recorded deficit in the b udget since 
1950, a sharp fall in foreign assets to a level sufficient for financing 3 months of impo rts, which 
were heavily controlled through regulations, economic growth as low as 3 per cent and a shortage 
of goods with suppressed inflation through price controls. 
Fostering Growth and Maintaining Stability in a Liberalised 
Environment
In 1977, Sri Lanka significantly departed from the closed economic policies and introduced 
policies to liberalise the economy. There was a fundamental change in the policy spectrum from 
the narrow objective of import substitution through extensive controls to an outward looking 
export oriented industrial development programme. The main features of the new policy included 
greater reliance on the market system for resource allocation, abandoning of import and exchange 
controls, harnessing of private foreign capital, etc. The year marked a significant milestone in 
PDFPAGE17
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
6
the history of the Central Bank, as it took leadership in driving the economy into the new era by 
setting appropriate monetary and exchange rate policies, establishing new institutional, legal and 
financial infrastructure and setting the right environment for investments.
The most significant reform was the readjustment of the exchange rate mechanism. Sri 
Lanka maintained a fixed exchange rate system through the 60s and most of the 70s with a 
rigid system of exchange controls. The Rupee was first devalued by 20 per cent in 1967  and 
supplemented with even a more depreciated exchange rate for nontraditional exports and non 
essential imports under a system of dual exchange rate in 1968. With the suspension of the 
convertibility of US dollar for gold in August 1971 by the United States, the rupee was linked 
to the US dollar, allowing the parities against other currencies to be determined on the basis of 
their cross rates with the US dollar in international foreign exchange markets. Sri Lanka moved 
from a hard peg to a single currency, to a basket peg in May 1976. The exchange rate system 
was changed to a crawling peg system in 1977 allowing it to reflect changes in macroeconomic 
fundamentals with the intention of making the exchange rate more realistic.
In monetary policy spectrum, policy was strengthened by improving scope, coverage and 
the strategy. The Bank redefined the monetary aggregates used for the policy purposes to take 
into account innovative instruments and practices introduced in the banking system. First, in 
1980, the definition of money supply was broadened from the narrow definition of  M 1 to M 2 by 
including the time and savings deposits of the public held with commercial banks. Second, the 
entire strategy of monetary policy was refined by applying appropriate instruments to influence 
and target monetary indicators more effectively. Third, the bank commenced preparing an annual 
monetary programme on a quarterly basis, which was compatible with the projected basic 
macro variables such as BOP, budgetary outcome, growth rate, and inflation in the country . The 
programme facilitated the use of monetary policy instruments in a more effective manner in order 
to maintain the monetary base at a desired level. 
The CBSL was instrumental in developing the money market particularly with the aim 
of successful implementation of the Open Market Operations (OMO). Repurchase facility was 
introduced for the first time in 1993 to absorb excess liquidity in the market and reverse repurchase 
facility was introduced in 1995 to provide liquidity on overnight basis and thereby containing the 
excessive volatility in the market. Money brokers were allowed to operate while new features 
were added to the market by establishing a secondary market for Treasury bills in the Central 
Bank. More importantly, the interest rates were allowed to move freely in the market in response 
to demand and supply forces thereby facilitating monetary policy transmission mechanism, 
promoting investments, encouraging savings and discouraging wasteful expenditures. 
During the first 20 years since 1977, the thrust of the monetary policy was placed on 
achieving both stability and development objectives. The key challenges were to tame overheating 
of the growing economy and address huge BOP deficits experienced throughout the perio d partly 
PDFPAGE18
7
The Long March of the Central Bank – 60 Years of Central Banking in Sri Lanka
due to external shocks. The challenge was intensified by expansionary fiscal deficits cropped up 
by the internal conflict, which started in the early 1980s and aggravated in 1983, 19 87, 1992, 
and 1996. Most of the time, the CBSL had adopted a rigid monetary policy stance to address 
all these issues by using conventional direct monetary policy instruments while at the same 
time continuing with development oriented refinance schemes extensively for priority sectors. 
Recognising the limited effectiveness of direct instruments, the emphasis was shifted to open 
market operations from mid 1984 and the bank issued its own securities to mop up the excess 
liquidity in the economy and the bank was successful in controlling monetary expansion in 
many instances. In order to make the implementation of monetary policy more effective while 
improving the government debt securities market, the bank took major steps during 1985 -1999, 
especially opening the discounting and rediscounting window for Treasury bills at the CBSL 
and thereby encouraging secondary market for Treasury bills and introducing weekly auctions 
and long maturities for Treasury bills, introducing Treasury bonds, reforming primary dealer 
system introduced in 1992, etc. Meanwhile moving towards more liberalisation in 1994, having 
completed the removal of restrictions on current international transactions, Sri Lanka accepted 
obligations under Article viii of the IMF articles of Agreement. 
The year 1996 is marked as a grey year in the history of the Central Bank. The most 
devastating and horrendous bomb explosion destroyed lives of 41 officers and made th e bank 
totally uninhabitable. The commitment, dedication and tireless effort made by the staff enabled 
the bank to restart its business the following day and rebuild the shattered business confidence 
within a very short period. Immediately after this event, the Bank had to deal with the Asian 
crisis, which took place in mid 1997 but the bank was fared well in handling economic affairs 
compared to most of its peer countries. 
Maintaining Economic and Price Stability in a Turbulent Environment
With the dawn of the new millennium, the Bank had to face a series of external as well as internal 
turbulences. In 2001 there was a sharp fall in external reserves as a combined effect of recession 
in the world economy, which severely reduced external trading activities, frequent terrorist 
attacks, which sharply curtailed tourism and business confidence and unfavourable weather, 
which resulted in a fall in domestic output. Having carefully considered this evolving condition , 
the Bank took a vital decision and moved in to an independently floating exchange rate regime in 
2001 enabling a turn around in the reserve loss by opening another channel to absorb the burden 
of external shocks. Despite an initial volatility that was short lived, the shift to a floating exchange 
rate system was well managed and supported by high interest rates and prudential measures on 
forex transactions issued to the authorised dealers. With the market gaining experience under the 
present exchange rate system, by adjusting policy rates gradually, rates of interest in the market 
were brought to their lowest by 2003 supported by improved macroeconomic environment, and 
prudential measures were relaxed gradually and withdrawn over time. 
PDFPAGE19
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
8
With the shift to a floating exchange rate regime, the exchange rate could no longer serve 
as a nominal anchor for monetary policy. Consequently, highlighting an important shift in the 
monetary policy strategy, the CBSL placed greater emphasis on reserve money, which became the 
operative target in the overall monetary programme, in pursuing the final objective of the p rice 
stability. In fact, with the financial market becoming more stable while strengthening economic 
and price stability, the bank introduced a system of Active Open Market Operation in 2003. This 
enabled the Bank to actively manage liquidity, to maintain interest rate stable within a corridor 
formed by its Repo and Reverse Repo rates while signalling a change in the monetary policy 
stance by shifting the corridor and thereby to attain its monetary policy targets more effectively.
Tsunami in December 2004 posed another challenge to the Bank in the conduct of its 
monetary policy. In recognition of the importance of keeping the banking system well liquid 
to ensure smooth operations and deal with any contingency, the Bank released liquidity quite 
liberally and even suspended the absorption of liquidity through daily auctions under  OMO for a 
limited period. In fact the Bank took precautionary measures and kept the payment systems open 
to meet any contingency. A special scheme was also implemented to assist people and businesses 
affected by Tsunami in their rehabilitation and reconstruction efforts. Under the circumstances, 
this accommodative policy stance had to be adopted despite rising pressures as indicated by 
higher monetary expansion and rising inflation. 
On the whole, the Bank has adopted a tight monetary policy stance since the beginning 
of the decade and was able to maintain inflation at single digit level until end 2004. In 2005  the 
inflationary pressures started to rise in particular due to supply related factors such as escalating oil 
prices in the international market and unfavourable weather conditions prevailed. In the meantime, 
the internal conflict that had ravaged the country for almost 3 decades reached a critical juncture 
by this time requiring a huge magnitude of resources and imposing severe pressure on banking 
system. The Bank had to be mindful of its responsibility in a war environment but recognised the 
need to maintain a balance between containing demand pressures and accommodating pressing 
requirements of resources. Accordingly, the Bank was rather conscious in adjusting its policy 
rates, but tightened its monetary policy stance gradually by imposing quantitative restrictions on 
access to the Central Bank funds by commercial banks and primary dealers and introducing a 
penal rate of interest for access beyond the limit.
The year 2008 will be remembered as one of the most difficult and challenging year 
in the CBSL history. Achieving of both objectives, economic and price stability and financial 
system stability, were severely threatened by unprecedented global shocks. Despite the tightened 
monetary policy stance adopted over the last few years, inflation accelerated to the highest ever 
recorded level owing to the impact of food and energy crisis in the global economy in 2008. 
However, the lagged impact of the tight monetary policy was observed since the latter part of 
the year and inflation sharply dropped from 28.2 per cent in June 2008 to 7 .6 per cent by end 
February 2009 with the improvement in supply side and tumbling food and energy prices with 
slowing down in global economy.
PDFPAGE20
9
The Long March of the Central Bank – 60 Years of Central Banking in Sri Lanka
The financial crises that emerged in the USA in 2007 intensified and turned into a global 
finance turmoil in September 2008. The turmoil triggered a sharp reversal of capital flows, 
resulting in a loss of 50 per cent of external official reserves as foreign investors, owing  to their 
own liquidity constraints liquidated their investments in government securities. The country 
also had to settle certain liabilities arising from petroleum imports and certain other imports 
as liquidity in international financial market virtually dried out with the financial crisis. The 
Bank was prepared to face the situation as it built up reserves when foreign investments were 
flowing into the government securities market, but as decline in reserves continued, measures 
were taken to obtain liquidity including commencing dialogues with friendly nations for 
SWAP arrangements and negotiations with the IMF for a Stand-By Arrangement (SBA). With 
the ending of the war in May 2009, there was a sharp improvement in investor confiden ce, 
which was further supported by the approval of the SBA facility in July 2009 and the fact that 
investors were able to liquidate their investments even at the peak of the financial crisis without 
incurring any losses. In fact, financial inflows commenced even before the approval of the I MF 
facility. There were inflows in large volumes even for long term Treasury bonds and the country 
was successful in floating its second sovereign bond in 2008 at a very competitive rate. While 
maintaining stability in the domestic foreign exchange market, measures were also implemented 
to ensure stability in the money market, as the rupee liquidity drained with the outflow of 
foreign exchange. Accordingly, the market liquidity was maintained by reducing SRR from 
10 per cent to 7 per cent by end February 2009 in three steps and by acquiring as and when 
deemed necessary government securities both at the primary issues and in the secondary market. 
The implementation of these measures was supported by the gradual decline in inflation and 
inflation outlook as observed since late 2008. The decline in inflation, lower interest rates and 
renewed investor confidence contributed to the robust performance of the equity market, wh ich 
became one of the best performing stock markets globally today. Undoubtedly, this remarkable 
recovery in the Sri Lankan economy was bolstered by the conscious, timely and coordinated 
policy efforts made by the Bank during these years.
Improving Transparency and Managing Expectations
In early years, central banks did not recognise the importance of sharing information 
particularly, those pertaining to policy decisions with the general public and always maintained 
secrecy. Conducting monetary policy was a mystery to the public. However, central banks 
around the world have become noticeably more open and transparent over the past fifteen 
years with the realisation of the importance of managing expectations in achieving their 
objectives. In line with this trend and the best practices adopted by other central banks during 
last decade or so, there has been a shift toward more transparency and openness in operations 
of the central banks while enhancing the predictability of its policy stance. As an integral part 
of making its monetary policy decisions and operations more transparent, the Bank appointed 
a Monetary Policy Committee to review the monetary policy stance on regular intervals and 
make recommendations to the Board and commenced issuing a monetary policy statement on 
PDFPAGE21
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
10
an advanced release calendar, following the monetary policy review by the Board, announcing 
the monetary policy decisions and underlying macroeconomic conditions. The decision making 
process pertaining to monetary policy has been further streamlined by appointing a Monetary 
Policy Consultative Committee made up of various stakeholders drawn from the private sector 
and academia, to independently review the Bank’s monetary policy actions and make suitable 
recommendations to the Board. With the objective of enhancing the policy predictability by 
keeping the public informed in advance, the Central Bank commenced announcing its Road 
Map for Monetary and Financial Sector Policies in January 2007. The communication strategy 
has been further strengthened through regular and occasional press releases on important 
economic developments and issues, Governor’s speeches in various forums on economic affairs 
and public lectures and seminars. 
As Promoter and Regulator of the Financial Sector
Over these 60 years, the CBSL has continued to preserve the soundness, efficiency and stability 
of the financial system while acting as a promoter and regulator of the financial sector. When 
the Central Bank was established in 1950, the banking system was in a rudimentary state with 
one domestic bank and some 10 foreign banks. None of these banks were lending outside 
their traditional spheres of activity and the emphasis in their business was largely on financing 
commerce and trade. The expansion in the banking sector especially branch expansion started 
with the establishment of Peoples Bank in 1962, an initiative of the CBSL. With the liberalisation 
of the economy in 1977, the CBSL took the leadership in thriving financial sector by way  of 
building institutions and financial infrastructure, strengthening legal and regulatory framework , 
allowing market determination of interest rates and opening areas for the private sector 
participation. Encouraged by this new initiatives, foreign banks entered in to the Sri Lank an 
market while the domestic private sector was also encouraged to start commercial banking, 
creating a competitive environment in banking industry. Almost all banks started Foreign 
currency banking units (FCBUs). Financial market was further strengthened by introducing new 
types of financial institutions such as Money brokers, venture capital companies, merchant banks, 
unit trusts etc. The Bank was instrumental in setting up of certain large financial institutions 
such as Development Finance Credit Corporation (DFCC), National Development Bank 
(NDB), National Savings Bank (NSB), to undertake specific banking functions, which were 
subsequently brought under the regulatory authority of the Central Bank as licensed specialised 
banks. In summary, over these 60 years, type of institutions, instruments, range of services, and 
the geographical coverage of the financial sector expanded significantly. The financial system has 
been evolved from a rudimentary financial system to a highly diversified system, from highly 
controlled to a system that functions with great market orientation, from a highly fragmented to a 
more consolidated system. Today Sri Lanka has a dynamic, vibrant and technologically advanced 
financial sector with 22 commercial banks, 14 long term financial institutions, 35 Finance 
companies, 74 Leasing companies and other entities such as Merchant/Investment banks, Venture 
capital companies, Mortgage banks etc.
PDFPAGE22
11
The Long March of the Central Bank – 60 Years of Central Banking in Sri Lanka
The CBSL has the sole authority of regulating and supervising the financial system in 
Sri Lanka. However, in early decades the need for extensive supervision of banks was not felt 
as the degree of complexity remained modest. The Banking Act No. 30 of 1988 strengthened  
regulatory powers of the CBSL in ensuring smooth functioning of the financial system  
safeguarding the interest of depositors. Meanwhile, a legal framework for regulating finance 
companies was enacted giving powers to the Central Bank to regulate and supervise finance 
companies in 1980. During 1986-88 there were failures of a number of finance comp anies and 
the Bank intervened to address and build confidence in the industry. A new Debt Recovery Law 
was enacted to make the banking system more viable while, a Credit Information Bureau was 
established in 1990 to share information with banking institutions to establish creditworthiness  
of prospective borrowers. 
With the rapid integration of the Sri Lankan economy with global financial markets, there 
is a potential threat to the financial system from financial turmoil in other countries. Further, 
money laundering, terrorist financing, pyramid schemes, unauthorised finance entities etc. have 
enhanced the severity of the threat. Having recognised these challenges and in line with the 
international best practices, the CBSL introduced new regulatory standards based on international 
guidelines provided by the Basel agreements in 1998. Supervisory and regulatory framework 
was further evolved in the recent decade with the introduction of prudential guidelines in the 
area of capital adequacy, liquid assets, loan loss provisioning and single borrower limit and the 
prudential regulatory framework has been evolved from a compliance-based approach to a r isk 
based approach, limiting risk concentrations and requiring financial institution to establish strong 
risks control systems. 
The year 2008 witnessed the implementation of a major policy initiative to strengthen the 
risk management system in banks with the adoption of pillar one of the Basel II capital adequacy 
standards. The implementation of the direction on corporate governance was a further milestone 
in this respect. The preemptive measures taken over the past years in the financial system and 
the enhanced risk management infrastructures placed the financial system on a strong footing to 
absorb the impact of the recent global financial turmoil. Meanwhile, the financial crisis originated 
from the collapse of the US sub prime mortgage market quickly spread throughout the finan cial 
markets in advanced as well as developing countries in 2008. This has had adverse effects at 
varying intensities on developing countries depending on their interaction with global economy. 
In the case of Sri Lanka, because of the fact that the capital account has not been fully liberalized 
and that many local banks did not trade in complex financial instruments, the direct impact of 
the global financial crisis on the financial sector was minimal. However, towards the end of 2008 
a crisis leading to a run of deposits was triggered in relation to Seylan Bank PLC (SBP) due to  
the contagion effect of the collapse of one of the companies of the Ceylinco Group, the Golden 
Key Credit Card Company Ltd. The sudden withdrawal of deposits resulted in a significant 
deterioration of the liquidity position of the SBP. As SBP is a systemically important bank, any 
failure of the bank to honour payments would have had a ripple effect on the entir e financial 
system, perhaps causing a systemic crisis. 
PDFPAGE23
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
12
The Central Bank took immediate action to resolve this situation. First, the resolution 
framework that was already in existence was activated by the Bank to respond to the situation in 
order to avert a potential danger to the stability of the financial system. The key strategy adop ted 
by the Bank was to revive SBP through rebuilding customer confidence. The bank appo inted 
a new Board of Directors to SBP, and allowed all employees to continue their work without 
interruption. Managerial assistance was provided through Bank of Ceylon and rupee liquidity 
was accommodated under the Central Bank Reverse Repo window. The depositors were assured 
safety of their deposits and SBP was requested to raise capital of around Rs. 3 billion to fu rther 
strengthen capital management and operations of the bank. The actions of the CBSL to rebuild 
customer confidence on the bank resulted to improve capital adequacy and liquidity levels of 
the bank significantly. The bank has successfully overcome the crisis and a year later recorded a 
healthy financial performance to build a sustainable business for the future. The timely and speedy 
action of the CBSL halted a crisis in the SBP and enabled the bank to safeguard the interest of all 
stakeholders without incurring public funds or any mode of nationalisation as occurred in many 
developed countries. 
In 2008/2009 there was a crisis in the non banking sector that spurred from the loss of 
public confidence in shadow banks which were either unregulated or less regulated. The crisis 
was confined to a few companies and the common features of affected companies were excessive 
exposure to the real estate sector, unauthorised deposit taking, weak risk management, imprudent 
related party transactions, unethical business practices, negative capital, accumulated losses, 
etc. Similar to the case of SBP, the CBSL adopted a specific resolution mechanism to promote 
customer confidence and rehabilitation of businesses of those institutions. The Bank was of the 
opinion that no public funds to be used as the crisis was due to the lapses of the directors and 
managers. The specific measures implemented were appointment of managing agents, ceilings 
on total deposit liabilities, stimulus package to raise funds using their marketable assets, removal 
of executive powers of directors, appointing a panel of experts to advise the business companies 
on business restructuring, strengthening regulatory framework relating to RFCs, etc. As a result 
of these measures, affected companies were able to rebuild their businesses with new capital and 
strategic investors.
In 2010, the regulatory and prudential framework of the financial sector was further 
strengthened with emphasis on capital enhancements, improvements to cooperate governance and 
risk management infrastructure in financial institutions. A financial safety net for depositors was 
introduced in 2010 with the implementation of the CBSL operated mandatory deposit insurance 
scheme for banks and finance companies to protect small depositors. In view of the deficiencies in 
the existing law a new law, for the regulation of finance businesses has been finalised to combat 
unauthorised deposit taking entities and to upgrade regulation of finance companies. The Banking 
Act is also being amended to enable consolidated supervision of banking groups with new 
provisions for mergers and acquisitions and bank resolution measures. 
PDFPAGE24
13
The Long March of the Central Bank – 60 Years of Central Banking in Sri Lanka
As a Debt Manager
The Bank as an agent of the government played a crucial role in improving government debt 
management over the 60 years. The CBSL initiated vital steps in developing the Government 
securities market as it is essential for raising required resources at lowest cost with a minimum 
risk and also for better liquidity management. In particular over the last 20 years activities in the 
market was greatly facilitated by introducing new market instruments such as Treasury bonds 
(1997), Sri Lanka development bonds (2001), Treasury bills with multiple maturities (1989), 
etc, while market structure was strengthened by introducing secondary market for Treasury bills 
(1981), weekly auction system (1986), accredited Primary dealer (PD) system (1992), which  was 
further improved as a dedicated PD system (2000) and Electronic bidding system (1998),  etc. In 
addition, a comprehensive and modern depository, delivery and settlement system that facilitates 
the issuance and settlement of debt securities improving market efficiency was in place since 
2004. Initiatives were taken to develop a secondary market for Treasury bills by introducing 
discount and rediscount windows at the CBSL. The CBSL’ s decision to open the Treasury bill 
and bond market for foreigners in 2006 and 2008, respectively, enhanced the depth and breadth of 
the debt securities market. The CBSL was instrumental in getting country Credit Rating in 2005 
and at the height of civil war; the CBSL raised US dollars 500 million through its debut sovereign 
bond issue in the international market in 2007. The subsequent sovereign bond issues in 2009 and 
2010 were even more successful and enabled better rearrangement of the public debt portfolio. 
Accommodating Special Needs
Since early 60’s, the CBSL has involved in addressing abject poverty in rural areas, supporting 
government policies. Having recognised its responsibility towards underprivileged groups, 
the bank actively engaged in designing and formulating rural credit schemes and providing 
subsidised credit through refinance schemes. The Medium and Long Term Credit Fund (MLCF)  
was introduced in 1964 to provide refinance for agriculture as well as industrial activities on a 
relatively long term basis while these efforts were strengthened by introducing credit guarantee 
schemes in 1974. The CBSL directly involved in regional development activities by instituting 
RRDBs in 1985 while the Rural Banking and Staff Training College was set up in 1980 mainly 
for capacity building. In 2004, the CBSL played a vital role in rebuilding Tsunami affected people 
by providing concessionary credit schemes. Considering monetary implications, although the 
CBSL’s direct refinancing has been reduced to a minimum in the recent decade, the CBSL is 
still involved in donor funded credit delivery process and capacity building as an agent of the 
government. All these years, the Bank was instrumental in building of institutional infrastructure 
and system development required for promotion of credit delivery in the regions. The Bank took 
the leadership in instituting the Development Finance Corporation of Ceylon, People’s Bank and 
National Development Bank while opening its own branches in Matara (1980), Anuradhapura 
(1982), Matale (1985) and Jaffna (2010). Since 2009, the CBSL has become activ ely involved in 
uplifting living conditions and improving financial inclusion in the Eastern and Northern region. 
PDFPAGE25
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
14
Modernising Central Bank
Over the 60 years, the CBSL has been modernised in many ways. At its inception, the Bank 
commenced its operations with 250 people and five departments. The bank has now grown in  
strength to 26 departments and 1,500 people to accommodate its expanded roles. In early 2000, 
the CBSL embarked on a special modernisation programme with the objective of creating a lean, 
modernised and efficient central bank by upgrading its systems and procedures, governance 
systems and by establishing a core financial infrastructure required for an evolving bank.  
After several years of discussions and deliberations the MLA was amended in 2002 and the 
amendments focused on the Bank’s objectives, expanding its governing Board and the powers 
of delegation, increasing the flexibility and effectiveness of monetary policy and exchange rate 
policy, improving payment and settlement system and strengthening the regulatory role of the 
bank. Before 2002, the bank had multiple objectives such as maintaining domestic monetary 
values, presenting the stability of exchange rate, the promotion of a high level of production, 
employment encouragement, real income and promotion of the full development of the productive 
resources of Sri Lanka. However, the bank realised that this achievement of multiple objectives 
was not easy as such an objective could be in conflict or be inconsistent. Hence, the bank focu sed 
on two key objectives namely price stability and the financial sector stability since 2002. The 
departure from the multiple objectives helped the bank to focus on key areas of central banking, 
which has also been advocated by international best practices. The size of the Monetary Board 
was expanded to have more representation of the private sector. The decision making process 
was strengthened with the establishment of the Monetary Policy Committee, Financial System 
Stability Committee, and the Audit Committee. The Bank adopted the International Accounting 
Standards for the Central Bank to have acceptable disclosure policy. The Bank introduced 
technologically advanced Real Time Gross settlement system (RTGS) in 2003, strengthening the 
payment and settlement system while eliminating undue risk exposure of the Bank in an end 
day net settlement system. Sri Lanka was the first country in South Asia to introduce such an 
advanced Payment and Settlement system. Government securities market was modernised and 
made more efficient by issuing securities in scripless form in a Scripless Securities Settlement 
system (SSS) with a Central Depository system (CDS). The SSS and CDS known as LankaSecure 
is linked to the RTGS to handle the fund settlement part of securities transactions to ensure the 
safety of investors in government securities, by effecting transactions on Delivery vs Payment 
basis and maintaining records of all transactions.
Conclusion 
The Central Bank of Sri Lanka has completed 60 years of fruitful operations while facing 
enormous challenges in preserving monetary and financial stability. The long journey will 
continue but the CBSL is likely to face unforeseen and unpredictable challenges, and also 
unprecedented opportunities. Sri Lanka is entering into a high growth path but in a more 
globalised environment over which the CBSL has little control. The recent financial turmoil 
PDFPAGE26
15
The Long March of the Central Bank – 60 Years of Central Banking in Sri Lanka
has clearly demonstrated the uncertainties and dilemmas of macroeconomic management in a 
globalised world. It was clearly evident that because of the interconnectedness of the financial 
markets, external developments influence domestic macroeconomic conditions in a complex, 
uncertain and unpredictable manner and central banks need to deepen their understanding of these 
interactions. The challenge for the CBSL is to better understand the interplay of global factors 
and domestic variables, and develop appropriate strategies and policy alternatives to handle the 
macroeconomy while building confidence internationally as well as domestically. Sustaining the 
low inflation and managing expectations will be the most challenging task in the monetary policy 
front. The bank will have to look for an even more appropriate monetary policy framework to 
well focus on the core objectives of price stability by moving away from the present system of 
targeting monetary aggregates, which could be less appropriate eventually in a modern financial 
system with a range of innovative instruments. In line with practices in other central banks, the 
communication strategy needs to be further developed as greater predictability can be of great 
help in shaping market expectations in line with the stance of monetary policy. With increased 
globalisation, financial sector stability is to be bolstered effectively and systemic oversight must 
be strengthened notably. As clearly evidenced by the recent global financial turmoil, the CBSL 
should have a more forward looking assessment of the risks to financial stability. Supervision 
has to be strengthened in line with the best international practices as the financial markets and 
products are evolving rapidly. Improved corporate governance in financial institutions is a must 
to ensure that the general public has confidence in the financial system. Improving independence 
and accountability of the CBSL operations is crucial in building public confidence in the CBSL 
policies, which is essential in meeting the Bank’s policy objectives effectively. Finally, capacity 
building of the institution itself is a challenge and committed, dedicated and well prepared staff 
is essential to take up these future challenges and for the CBSL to become a more dynamic and 
credible Bank contributing to prosperity of the country.
References
Aziz, Zeti Akhtar. “Fifty Years of Central Banking – Stability and Sustainability.” Ceremony for the 50th Anniversary of 
Bank Negara Malaysia. Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, 2009.
Central Bank of Ceylon. Central Bank of Ceylon 1950-1975: Commemorative V olume. Colombo: Central Bank of 
Ceylon, 1975.
Central Bank of Sri Lanka. 40th Anniversary Commemorative V olume. Colombo: Central Bank of Sri Lanka, 1990.
---. Annual Report, Various Issues.
---. Economic Progress of Independent Sri Lanka. Colombo: Central Bank of Sri Lanka, 1998.
---. Road Map: Monetary and Financial Sector Policies. 2007, 2008, 2009, 2010.
Exter, John. Report on the Establishment of a Central Bank of Ceylon: Sessional Paper No.XIV: Ceylon Government, 
1949.
Government of Ceylon. “Monetary Law Act No. 58.” 1949.
Karunathilake, H.N.S. Fifty Years of Central Banking in Sri Lanka 1950-2000. Colombo: Centre for Demographic and 
Socio Economic Studies, 2000.
Lipsky, John. “The Road Ahead for Central Banks: Meeting New Challenges to Financial Stability.” International 
Conference on Central Banks and Development of the World Economy: New Challenges and a Look Ahead. Moscow, 
Russia, 2010.
PDFPAGE27
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
16
Subbarao, Duvvuri. “Challenges for Central Banks in the Context of the Crisis.”  International Research Conference on 
Challenges for Central Banks in the Context of the Crisis. Mumbai, India, 2010.
Wijewardena, W.A. “Central Banking in Turbulent Times: Challenges for Central Bankers.” John Exter Memorial 
Oration, 2008.
---. Central Banking Nearly Six Decades after John Exter. Occasional Papers V ol. 62. Colombo: Central Bank of Sri 
Lanka, 2007.
PDFPAGE28
17
The Day of Deadly Attack
It was 31 January 1996, a Wednesday. With the dawn of this 
business day, the Central Bank of Sri Lanka (CBSL), the 
intellectual power house and the heart of the financial sector of 
the economy, was awaking to another busy day of hard work 
to provide a stable economic environment and professional 
guidance for the nation to strive for prosperity. 
As the day was growing, all departments of the Bank with 
specific responsibilities were warming up for the day: to execute 
international payments and settlements, to provide liquidity to 
the economy through the banking system, to raise required funds 
for the govenment Treasury, to monitor and supervise banks and 
other registered financial institutions to ensure financial system 
stability, to conduct the monetary policy to maintain price stability, to provide economic advice to 
the government for better economic management, to collect data and information and to attend to 
other services demanded by the nation from the Bank. As usual, people were flocking to the cash 
Rising from the Ashes –
The Central Bank’s Remarkable Recovery 
from the Terrorist Attack
C.P.A. Karunatilake
Superintendent, Currency Department
2
PDFPAGE29
18
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
counters with busy cashiers to meet their needs with respect 
to cash and payments. Commercial banks were busy with 
both withdrawing and depositing cash to match their liquidity 
requirements to cater to the needs of the economy. The entire 
financial sector was gearing up for yet another day with the 
pulses of the Central Bank operations providing life and strength 
to the entire economic system. 
The day was still young, and every pulse of the Bank 
was moving with its usual busy rhythm when suddenly it 
was disturbed with sounds of firing bullets around the CBSL 
premises. Some of those inside the building, without knowing 
exactly what was happening, were peeping through the 
windows with curiosity. Those who were outside the building 
were terrified with what they were observing. LTTE terrorists 
were trying to enter the Bank premises with a lorry laden with 
a huge load of explosives to destroy the heart of the country’s 
financial system with the aim to paralyse the whole economy. 
Fortunately, they were not successful in entering the lorry to the 
Bank premises, thanks to the barriers constructed during late  
Dr. H N S Karunatilaka’s Governorship. Had they been 
successful, the story would have been a horribly different one, perhaps written by another writer. 
To the horror of all, the deadly bomb exploded outside the Bank premises around 10.50 in the 
morning with a trembling thunder that shocked the entire Fort area.
Rescuing the Affected 
The shock was felt in a radius of many miles. A dead silence prevailed for a moment, as all were 
numb with the shock. Then, those who panicked with the shock and feared that more severe 
disasters were imminent started screaming. However, those who were courageous and able to 
manage themselves to face the situation guided the frightened colleagues to the rear exit doors 
and attended to take the wounded to hospitals soon. A stream of people with cuts, wounds, and 
blood stains was seen climbing down through the emergency exits to move to safety, fearing th at 
the whole building would be caught in fire, explode, and collapse soon. Despite an imminent 
danger to their lives, there were many brave sons and daughters of the Bank who dared to go 
into the building to search, if any of their colleagues or visitors were trapped in and to help them 
out safely. The Governor of the Central Bank at the time of the incident, Mr. A S Jayawar dane, 
in an interview with the writer, remembered those brave officers with gratitude and commended 
that “they did everything possible to rescue the affected including their colleagues, and by the 
time the rescuers came from outside, most of the affected had been removed to safety and sent to 
hospitals”. 

PDFPAGE30
19
Rising from the Ashes –The Central Bank’ s Remarkable Recovery from the Terrorist Attack
It is worth mentioning that there was no central coordination of the rescue operation, and 
everyone who felt the need of their service offered it in whatever way they could. Some o fficers 
were seen driving bank vehicles loaded with affected colleagues rushing them to hospitals. Since 
all the entry and exit gates at the ground level were blocked with rubble, the wounded had  to be 
brought through narrow stairways at the back of the building, a difficult task. Some wer e injured 
so badly that the rescuers could not even touch them and hence, they were brought down in 
window curtains, as stretchers were not available at the time. Some of those who are still in the 
bank cannot even remember how they did it. “It is our inherited spirit that energised us there, 
nothing else I can think of”, one officer claimed proudly. True, we should be pr oud of our being 
able to save our affected colleagues to get medical attention soon, failure of which could have 
registered a much higher fatality rate. 
However, the attack left 41 CBSL officers and several visitors dead, 8 CBSL officers 
totally blind, 11 CBSL officials partially paralysed, and few hundreds wounded, some badly.  The 
estimated financial cost of the physical destruction was eno rmous.
They All were Wrong
There is no doubt that the terrorists would have celebrated their victory of destroying the heart 
of the financial sector and paralysing the entire economic machine to peril the entire nation 
enabling them to move few extra miles to reach their dreamed kingdom, had their expectations 
been materialised. In terms of strategic objectives, this attack has parallels with the September 11 
terrorist attack on the World Trade Centre in New York, as terrorists, in general, illusively believe 
that the heart of an economy and its strength lie in physical structures, especially of the financial 
system, of the economy. The LTTE terrorists at that time had attempted a series of attacks on 
the key economic centres of our economy, while many more targets were in their planned future 
attacks. Among all their targets the Central Bank attack could have been considered their master 
piece, as the Bank has been the power house of the entire economy both in terms of managing 
the economy in turbulent times in all fronts and assisting the government to mobilise financial 
resources to finance its projects. Accordingly, the terrorists had many reasons to celebrate their 
attack, had they achieved their strategic objective. 
They would have been assessing: how our nation would be humiliated and condemned 
by the world for failing to honour international payments and settlements and for defaulting in 
servicing our foreign debt, how the whole economy would come to a deadly standstill with the 
collapse of the entire financial system, how the government would run out of money with the 
collapse of borrowing programmes, how the destruction of the database of the nation’s lar gest 
provident fund, Employees’ Provident Fund, would also have created public unrest ag ainst the 
government, and all in all, how the entire Sri Lankan nation would be stranded in chaos in all 
fronts. Had this happened, the terrorists would have been able to claim their victory. Had anyone 
expected a similar situation by undermining the strength of our spirit and our resilience to shocks, 
they all were wrong.
PDFPAGE31
20
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
Rising from the Ashes
Sri Lanka is a nation with a hidden spirit that has always surprised others with her resilience and 
revival in crisis situations. During the pause of dead silence that prevailed after the explosion 
those hidden spirits invigorated the forces and kept them in motion to rejuvenate the affected  
heart of the economy. While the brave officers of the CBSL were attending to the immediate 
task of rescuing affected colleagues and sending them for medical treatment, the place had to be 
protected from possible further attacks and from opportunists who could attempt to exploit the 
situation to loot. Accordingly, the whole area was brought under the control of security forces 
and declared a restricted zone. The immediate business task was to address the public confidence 
with respect to the operations of the Bank and ensure that financial sector operations were intact. 
Immediately after attending to the needs of that crucial time, it was decided to resume operation 
of the Central Bank from the premises of its own Centre for Banking Studies (CBS) at Rajagiriya 
the very next day, and accordingly, a public announcement was made through media that all 
financial operations of the Bank would be available to meet the public requirements. The Central 
Bank officers who were not affected physically were also requested to report for duty the next day 
at CBS at Rajagiriya. 
On Thursday, 01 February 1996, all officers who were not hurt at the previous day bomb 
attack at the head office flocked at CBS by early morning. They all were prepared with high spirit, 
enthusiasm, and determination to bring the Bank back on her breath and feet soon and resume 
operations to make her presence felt to the nation. The spirit of this sense of responsibility and 
the commitment had even amazed some observers abroad. The Governor, Mr. A S Jayawardena, 
at a discussion with the writer, at the time of writing, on his experience in the aftermath of the 
attack quoted a CEO of a foreign bank who paid him a visit of solidarity saying that “I cannot 
believe that your officers reported for duty the very next day. Had this happened in my country, 
people would not have even thought of reporting to work for weeks”. “Our strength is that spirit” 
Governor commended with a high sense of gratitude. 
At the special assembly that morning, the Governor, briefed the eagerly waiting workforce 
about the plans ahead for revival of the Bank, while attending to the needs of the affected ones. 
Accordingly, the department heads were to arrange task forces with their officers to resume their 
duties in whatever ways possible. A special task force was formed under the welfare department 
to look after the welfare of those who were affected and their loved ones, and to attend to funeral 
arrangements of the deceased. Since the new location had limited space to accommodate all 
officers, some of the employees were requested to stay at their homes and kept them on standby 
and to be called to duty at short notice.
According to the priorities at that moment, the international obligations were to be attended 
to first. Even without prior instructions, officers who were responsible for handling in ternational 
transactions had come with whatever information accessible to them to resume their work. Some 
PDFPAGE32
21
Rising from the Ashes –The Central Bank’ s Remarkable Recovery from the Terrorist Attack
officers had managed to grab whatever important documents they were working with at the time 
of explosion when they left the Bank premises for safety after the bomb and such documents were 
very useful for speedy resumption of work. Institutional memory of the experienced officers was 
an invaluable wealth of information in making required payment and settlement arrangements. 
Accordingly, on the very next day of the attack all counterparties in the network of international 
payments and settlement were contacted. All of them were already aware of the situation and 
were even prepared to offer whatever possible support for the speedy recovery of the Bank. Some 
foreign banks offered their support to settle due international obligations that were to be attended 
to immediately. Some were so generous and caring to write off certain dues in appreciation 
of the sound and long standing cordial relationships the Sri Lankan nation had established for 
generations. Governor Jayawardena was proud in saying “we did not default in any of our foreign 
obligations, which is a verdict to our resilience to adjust to any contingent situation.” 
Public Debt management was another area of priority. The weekly Treasury bill auction was 
disrupted due to the bomb explosion, as it was to be conducted on the same day. The Ban k was 
able to avert any shortage of funds for the government by arranging the auction  on the very next 
day in collaboration with the officers from the Treasury and primary dealers. All other finan cial 
transactions with respect to government fiscal operations were resumed with similar arrangements 
to the credit of the responsible officers with high degree of commitment. Currency operation s 
with commercial banks were started from the Treasury building while public counters were 
opened with the help of the two state banks. The establishment of the EPF database with physical 
and electronic records relieved the members of the fund that their life savings were secured. The 
nation could take a breath of relief that the worst was over.
The timing of the bomb posed another challenge to the Bank. It was the time that all key 
departments of the bank were geared to the preparation of the comprehensive analytical report 
with policy prescriptions for economic management, the Central Bank Annual Report, 1995. Th e 
entire project had to be revamped from ground zero, as the entire data base and work  in progress 
had been destroyed by the fire that erupted following the bomb. Compared to the usual time 
period of one year under normal circumstances, the officers had only less than three month s to 
establish the data base and redo the entire report to be submitted to the Minister in charge of the 
subject of Finance by 30 April 1996, which was a statutory obligation under the Monetar y Law 
Act. Exceptional skills, experience, and indefatigable commitment of the human wealth that the 
Bank can be proud of, made it by having the report ready on the due date. Notably, one senior 
officer of the Bank proudly said “it was the best report the Bank had produced ever, as it was 
prepared with a new and better structure, and more importantly, it was completed with the least 
facilities at disposal.” 
Governor Jayawardane, while appreciating the invaluable contribution of all officers to 
revive the Bank operations, finally said “it was only the loss of one day’s business and we were 
able to bring all the functions of the Bank into normalcy in a surprisingly shorter period of time”. 
PDFPAGE33
22
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
This is a victory that all Sri Lankans and their friends can claim for, as they all were 
together in their hearts and minds to see the fast recovery. The banking community including 
fellow central bankers worldwide deserves a bouquet of our appreciation for being with us 
throughout our recovery process.   
Then, Now, and the Way Forward
The expectations of the terrorists in detonating that deadly bomb was to fuel a vicious force to 
exert complete destruction to the nation. However, the far reaching skillful vision of the Bank was 
able to see it otherwise; it envisaged the dawn of a new era through the dark tunnel of destruction 
enabling it to engineer the disastrous situation to fuel a virtuous force that could envigorate the 
Bank to face the challenges ahead. Accordingly, the recovery of the Bank was not just restoratio n 
of its operations to the state before the bomb; it transformed the entire operational structure to suit 
the new era with increasing globalisation. The destruction was transformed into an opportunity to 
remove the constraints and rigidities of the existing structure for the required change. Finally , the 
recovery process gave birth to a new working environment and culture. 
Once the CBSL premises was ready 
after a complete renovation, with a facelift 
to the ill fated old building and added two 
new wings, it stood as a modern Central 
Bank equipped with a conference hall of 
international standards named to honour 
the Bank’s founding Governor, late Mr. 
John Exter, complete IT environment with 
intra and international networks, and a 
working environment with all types of 
modern facilities including a fully equipped 
research library of the modern world, where 
knowledge commands. 
To mark this historic turning point of the Central Bank a statue has been erected to honour 
not only those courageous sons and daughters of the Bank, who made a noble sacrifice o n that 
day, but also to honour those who laboured through their blood, tears, and sweat to bring her 
breath back and to help her stand on her feet to serve the nation. The “Weera Samadhi” (the 
Statue of Courage), stands as the symbol our gratitude. 
When modernisation of the physical structure was in the formation, a complete overhaul of 
the administrative structure also was in progress. The restructuring process that emerged with the 
revival has culminated in the overall Central Banking operations being structured under five main 
clusters by now. The management structure was also aligned accordingly with clear demarcation 

PDFPAGE34
23
Rising from the Ashes –The Central Bank’ s Remarkable Recovery from the Terrorist Attack
of responsibilities and execution powers. A comprehensive strategic plan with lucidly articulated 
vision, mission, and the values that guide the operations and the way forward of the Bank is in 
place. The progress of the operations with respect to achieving the goals and the effectiveness 
of the strategies as stipulated in the set goals is under continuous review. The strategic plan is 
annually reviewed with a five year time horizon to meet the challenges in the changing business 
environment. A risk management committee conducts continuous evaluations of the risk profile of 
the Bank and implements mitigating measures following international best practices. The activity 
based budget plan has streamlined efficient and effective financial management. A business 
continuity plan is also in place to face any contingent situation to ensure continuation of its 
operations under any eventuality. 
A comprehensive human resource management programme has been established under the 
Governorship of Mr. Ajith Nivard Cabraal along with the infusion of new blood at all categories 
of officers. It has been designed to fill the identified human resource gaps and to elevate the 
human capital stock of the Bank and its quality in line with the expanded scope and increasing 
sophistication of the operations of the Central Bank’s new business model. The need for 
continuous training with enhanced knowledge and skills in all fronts and at all levels to meet 
the challanges in a dynamic business environment is given due attention with required financial 
resources. The entire operation of the Bank has been repositioned to face the challenges of the 
new era and to deliver prosperity to the nation that has awakened with renewed expectations by 
seeing the dawn of lasting peace following complete eradication of terrorist menace. The nation 
will undoubtedly enjoy the fruits of this transition for generations to come. 
All in all, the Central Bank of Sri Lanka, which revived from the deadly terrorist attack and 
turned the destruction into a foundation for continuous change and progress to suit a new era and 
face challenges of a dynamic business environment with increasing sophistication stands today 
with heightend might, influence, and glamour, than ever over the entire Sri Lankan econo my. 
Now, the Bank is geared with a clear vision to serve the vibrant economy emerging in the  
new era. 
Our Legacy
Terrorists attacked the physical structure of the Central Bank of 
Sri Lanka, but they failed to find and touch her heart of eternal 
spirit to bounce back with enhanced vigour. Every year on 31 
January, all of us in the Bank flock at “Weera Samadi” not to 
weep, but to honour our lost heroes and also to remind ourselves 
of the purity of our spirit and the strength of our steel that were 
tested on that day. It is the day of reawakening to move forward 
to build a strong economy for the nation to prosper in all fronts. 

PDFPAGE35
24
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
The remarkable recovery of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka from the deadly terrorist attack 
proved that rising from the ashes is not confined to the mythical bird, the Phoenix; we can make 
it a reality, if we have a far reaching vision, courage to transform destruction into an opportunity 
and a committed team of workers with gratitude to their bread winner. 
That is the legacy we are leaving behind for the generations to come.
PDFPAGE36
25
During the past 60 year period, Sri Lanka faced numerous internal and external shocks. Some were 
positive shocks, most of which were short-lived, while the majority were negative, originating 
from both external and internal factors, and sent waves of destabilisation through the entire 
economy. These adverse shocks affected many macroeconomic variables of the country, including 
economic growth, inflation, exchange rate, balance of payments (BOP), budget deficit as well 
as the stability of the financial system and created periods of economic uncertainty, particularly 
among economic agents in taking various decisions and undertaking various activities. 
The economy faced two key positive shocks in terms of export commodity price increases 
during the 1950s. While the Korean War significantly raised international rubber prices dur ing 
1950-52, the tea prices in the international market increased significantly during the 1954-5 5 
period, thereby improving export earnings, creating a surplus in the BOP and leading  to a surplus 
in the budget due to the increased revenue from exports related taxes. Another significant positive 
shock was seen in the 1976-77 period with the increase of tea prices in the international market. 
The adverse external shocks were in many areas, including the decline in export prices, increase 
in import prices of commodities, including the price of crude oil, and financial market related 
developments. The internal shocks were mainly in the form of an internal conflict, political 
uncertainties and natural disasters. In those circumstances, policy makers and authorities also 
faced uncertainty in their courses of action. In order to deal with these types of adverse shocks, 
Stability in the Midst of Uncertainty
K.M.M. Siriwardena
Additional Director, Economic Research Department 
(Currently on release to the Ministry of Finance and Planning)
3
PDFPAGE37
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
26
policy makers and authorities, including the Central Bank of Sri Lanka (CBSL), introduced 
various policies and measures to address uncertainties and maintain stability considering pros and 
cons of the possible responses. The remainder of this article attempts to summarise the highlights 
of such adverse events during the past 60 years. 
BOP Crisis in mid-1960s
Since 1957, Sri Lanka’s external position continued to worsen and needed corrective measures. 
The government and the CBSL introduced various measures to stabilise the external position, 
including the introduction of stringent import and exchange restrictions. However, there was a 
BOP crisis in mid 1960s, triggered mainly by low export prices and a high volume of imports. In 
order to maintain export competitiveness and induce an adjustment to BOP, Sri Lanka devalued 
the rupee on 22 November 1967, and a dual exchange rate system was introduced involving a 
Foreign Exchange Entitlement Certificate System (FEECS) with a partial liberalisation of imports. 
First Oil Price Shock during 1973-74
The increase in international oil prices led the country to implement various measures during 
this period. Given the rapid increase in oil prices, import controls were further tightened to keep 
the external payments situation under control. The impact of the price increase was passed on 
to the domestic consumers. Consequently, the consumption of all petroleum based products 
decreased, and the increase in export proceeds of petroleum based products were partially used to 
subsidise domestic consumption. Sri Lanka received the support from the International Monetary 
Fund (IMF) under the Scheme for Compensatory Financing for Export Fluctuations while the 
suppliers’ credit facilities were also obtained to face the situation. The gradual recovery of the 
tourism industry, which was interrupted by the state of civil unrest in 1971, too helped bring in 
foreign exchange to the country. Meanwhile, inflation increased considerably, which was mainly 
addressed through government subsidies and price controls.
Second Oil Price Shock during 1979-80
The significant rise of international oil prices resulted in an increase in the import bill on 
intermediate goods in the 1979-80 period. As a result, the trade deficit increased significantly 
and the current account recorded huge deficits. The BOP in 1980 turned negative after  a period 
of continuous surpluses since 1975. Given the deteriorated external situation, the IMF, in January 
1979, approved an Extended Fund Facility (EFF) for a three year period from 1979 to 1981 to 
support Sri Lanka’s BOP position.
Internal Conflict during 1983-2009
The internal conflict, which prevailed for more than 26 years since 1983, is one of th e most 
severe shocks experienced by Sri Lanka, which led to uncertainties in every corner of the country. 
The conflict resulted in severe losses in terms of invaluable human lives, human suffering and 
PDFPAGE38
Stability in the Midst of Uncertainty
27
displacements. The infrastructure and the economy in the North and the East were severely 
destroyed and investment and other economic activities in the entire country were adversely 
affected, decelerating economic growth significantly. The government had to incur a significant 
cost in terms of defence expenditure, creating pressure on all macroeconomic variables. Although 
successive governments made various efforts to end the conflict, it was only in May 2009, th e 
government was able to end the conflict comprehensively. The successful conclusion of the 
conflict is a result of a well planned and focused attempt with strong and unwavering commitment 
on the part of the government.
Gulf Crisis in 1990
The economic performance of Sri Lanka was affected by the Gulf crisis in 1990, although the 
period of high oil prices it caused was relatively short. Increased oil prices adversely impacted the 
oil import bill and the BOP. In particular, the expenditure on petroleum imports in 19 90 rose by 
about 46 per cent over the previous year. The domestic prices of petroleum products were increased 
on two occasions in August and November 1990, and were subsequently revised downwards with 
the stabilisation of international oil prices. The inflation rate, which was relatively high in 1989, 
accelerated sharply in 1990 mainly reflecting the impact of higher oil prices. 
Asian Financial Crisis in 1997-98
The Asian financial crisis, while having a significant impact on the global economy and created 
uncertainties in the international markets, had no significant impact on the Sri Lankan economy. 
The 1997 Annual Report of the CBSL reported that “…The recent improvement in Sri Lank a’s 
macroeconomic conditions, the maintenance of some capital controls, the low exposure to short-
term foreign debt, enhanced surveillance of financial market activity and a rise in short-term 
interest rates towards the end of the year helped to maintain a reasonable degree of stability in the 
domestic financial market in a highly volatile and uncertain external environment and to avoid a 
contagion effect of the East Asian crisis…”. In 1997, the economy grew by 6.4 per cent while it 
was a moderate rate of 4.7 per cent in 1998. The inflation rate remained at a moderate level of  9 
per cent, the budget deficit declined to 7 per cent of GDP in 1998 and the BOP recorded surpluses 
with current account recording lower deficits. The 1998 Annual Report of the CBSL reported that 
“…Survival in a sea of turbulence became an achievement and the Sri Lanka economy could be 
deemed to have fared reasonably well during the biggest crisis it faced since 1930s”. 
Multiple Shocks in 2001
The economic performance in 2001 was significantly affected by various shocks and uncertainties. 
The 2001 Annual Report of the CBSL reported that “... An unfavourable global eco nomic 
environment, exacerbated by domestic uncertainties, made 2001 a very difficult year for the Sr i 
Lankan economy”. The shocks included: (i) the slowdown in the global economy reducin g the 
PDFPAGE39
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
28
demand for Sri Lankan exports causing a deterioration of external trade activities, which was 
deepened following the September 11 terrorist attack in the USA; (ii) the prolonged draught,  that 
declined agriculture output, increased domestic food prices and reduced hydro power generation 
resulting in power cuts; (iii) the terrorist attack on the Katunayake International Airport, which 
disturbed economic activity, weakened investor confidence and led to the imposition of a war risk 
premium; and (iv) political uncertainty that postponed reform. As a combined outcome of these 
major factors, the economy recorded a widespread negative growth of 1.5 per cent, the first time 
in the post independence period. Inflation increased to double digit level, budget deficit incr eased 
to above 10 per cent of GDP and the external position weakened. A BOP crisis was imminent, and 
the depletion of official foreign exchange reserves and the severe pressure on the exchange rate to 
depreciate, displayed the inability of a central bank to pursue multiple objectives simultaneously. 
Monetary policy was tightened and prudential measures were imposed to ensure financial market 
and financial system stability. 
However, as a result of the measures taken by the government, the CBSL and various 
stakeholders coupled with other positive developments, the economy recovered since 2002. 
Accordingly, economic growth rebounded into the positive territory, inflation declined, ex ternal 
position recovered and the budget deficit declined. In particular, the country made prog ress in 
exchange rate management by graduating into an independently floating exchange rate regime in 
January 2001 towards further market orientation of the exchange rate.
Tsunami Disaster in 2004
Sri Lanka was severely affected by the Indian Ocean Tsunami disaster in December 2004. The 
2004 Annual Report of the CBSL reported that … “Tsunami caused extensive damage along more 
than two thirds or over 1,000 km of the coastline…. About 31,000 human lives have been lost, over 
4,000 persons are reported missing and nearly 550,000 were left homeless. Coastal infrastr ucture 
and public and private property in the affected areas were damaged while economic activities, 
mainly fishing, tourism, trading and small scale industries, have been damaged. The total damage 
is estimated to be around US dollars 1 billion (4.9 per cent of GDP)…”. The CBSL ensured that 
the market remained liquid and stood ready to deal with any interruption to the payment system. 
The recovery from this huge natural disaster needed a strong and coordinated effort. Financing 
needs for reconstruction were estimated at US dollars 1.5-1.6 billion and included upgrades in 
the power, water, and transportation sectors. It was expected that the reconstruction efforts would 
exert pressure on the BOP and the fiscal situation. Economic growth was initially to be lower 
than the original projections. The significant financial and material support received in various 
ways by bilateral and multilateral donors, private institutions and general public helped overcome 
the situation, while the CBSL took steps to avoid excessive appreciation of the rupee. Inflation 
remained subdued through prudent monetary policy measures and by the favourable developments 
in aggregate supply. The stability of the financial system was strengthened through improved 
supervision and regulations. Meanwhile, economic growth was better than initially expected. 
PDFPAGE40
Stability in the Midst of Uncertainty
29
End of the Multi-fibre Agreement (MFA) in 2005
From the beginning of 2005, the MFA, which governed the international trade in textile and 
apparel through a system of quota, was abolished. The increased international competition in the 
quota-free market environment resulted in some major firms taking measures to increase their 
competitiveness through enhancing productivity, focusing on high value products and upgrading 
human capital, design and marketing skills. Many players were well prepared to deal with the 
situation, although small and medium enterprises displayed increased vulnerability.
Commodity Price Increases during 2006-08 
The rising petroleum and commodity prices in international market threatened the achievement of 
price stability during the 2007-08 period. The adverse impact of these price increases negated the 
favourable impact that arose from the demand management policies implemented by the CBSL to 
a considerable extent. The 2007 Annual Report of the CBSL reported that “… It was disappointing 
for the monetary authority to observe the negation of the demand management efforts by external 
price shocks and supply side shocks, despite tighter and more disciplined monetary policy stance 
maintained by the Central Bank”. 
The external price shocks particularly came from the international petroleum prices, which 
rose to unprecedented levels by end 2007. The discontinuation of the fuel subsidy given to oil 
distributing companies by the government since July 2006 to reduce the fiscal cost of subsidies 
helped the government to reduce the impact of high oil prices on its fiscal operations. The removal 
of the subsidy had a one off impact on headline inflation which would dissipate over time bu t 
the long-term impact would be positive with the removal of financing needs of the government.  
However, the CBSL was concerned on the potential second round effect of the prices which would 
lead to lasting inflation, hence a further tightening of monetary policy took place.
The world food prices, especially the prices of staple foods, increased sharply in 2007 and a 
considerable part in 2008 after showing initial signs from late 2006. The Global Food Price Index 
(2002-2004=100), compiled by the Food and Agricultural Organisation (FAO), r eached the peak 
of 214 by June 2008, recording an year-on-year increase of 44 per cent.  Reflecting the severity of 
the impact of commodity prices increase, including oil, the point-to-point inflation increased to 
28.2 per cent in June 2008. 
The government dealt with the world food crisis in many fronts, including the use of tax 
policy to provide concessions, continuation of the fertiliser subsidy, and introduction of policy 
stimulus to promote agriculture, while reinforcing the government’s national programme “Api 
Wawamu – Rata Nagamu” (Let us grow – Let us develop) to improve domestic agriculture. 
Due to the tight monetary policy stance of the CBSL, coupled with the healthy domestic supply 
side conditions and the sharp decline in international commodity prices from around mid 2008, 
inflation decelerated to 14.4 per cent by end 2008.        
PDFPAGE41
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
30
Twin Crises during 2008-10 
The most challenging shock that created a significant uncertainty in the country’s recent history 
was the global financial crisis and the subsequent global economic recession. Since September 
2008, the global economy passed through its deepest financial and economic crisis since the 
Great Depression in 1930s. The primary impact of the global financial crisis on Sri Lanka was 
minimal as the country’s capital account was not fully liberalised and many local banks did not 
trade in collateralised debt instruments. Also, Sri Lankan financial institutions had only a small 
relationship with those foreign institutions that were severely affected during the financial crisis. 
The prudential regulations helped limit foreign exposure of banks and this limited exposure 
shielded the domestic financial institutions from the primary impact of the global financial crisis. 
However, Sri Lanka experienced a second round economic impact due to the global 
economic slowdown and liquidity crunch in the global capital market. The impact of the financial 
crisis led to a large scale flight of capital due to withdrawals of foreign investments in Treasury 
bills and bonds by the foreign investors since last quarter of 2008 at a time of great uncertainty, 
which continued until March 2009. The 2009 Annual Report of the CBSL reported  that “… On 
the external front, Sri Lanka continued to be impacted by the spill-over effects of the global 
financial and economic crises… The sudden withdrawal of capital by foreign investors resulting 
from adverse global conditions placed an enormous strain on the country’s foreign reserves and 
the management of liquidity.”
As a result of the declining global demand, foreign trade of the country was affected 
adversely. The decline in foreign inflows forced the government to rely on domestic financin g, 
particularly for infrastructure development projects already commenced. Tourist arrivals declined 
significantly, reflecting the impact of the crisis on many tourism generating countries. However, as 
the price of commodities, such as oil, declined, the narrowed trade deficit had a favourable impact 
on the BOP though the country registered its highest level of trade deficit in 2008. T otal inward 
remittances in 2008 were lower than expected. The external current account recorded a significant 
deficit of 9.3 per cent of GDP while the BOP turned into a deficit of US dollars 1.2 billion in 2008 
after 3 continuous years of surpluses. The country’s reserve position declined to US d ollars 1.8 
billion by end 2008. The continuation of the outflow however, resulted in a significan t decline in 
foreign reserves to US dollars 1.2 billion by March 2009. The unemployment rate, which declined 
to a minimum level in 2008, increased again during the first half of 2009 due to the closure and/or 
the downsizing of some firms as a result of the global recession. 
Economic growth decelerated gradually reflecting the significant decline in international 
trade and decelerated domestic economic activity. There was a notable decline in the real 
output to 1.5 per cent in the first quarter of 2009. Despite the low interest rate enviro nment, the 
growth in credit to the private sector declined significantly in 2009, mainly due to the lack o f 
demand for loans as a result of the slowdown in economic activity and the cautious approach 
PDFPAGE42
Stability in the Midst of Uncertainty
31
to lending adopted by banks amidst the uncertain environment. FDI indicated a decline as 
against the continuous increase recorded in recent years. Meanwhile, the fiscal sector suffered 
seriously with a significantly declined revenue due to the decline in imports as the country’s tax 
base significantly depended on imports. This resulted in a higher budget deficit increasing the 
borrowing requirement.  
This situation created uncertainties about the sustainability of the country’s economy and 
hence, the authorities and policy makers had to respond by taking decisions with calculated risks. 
Accordingly, the CBSL and the government implemented coordinated and timely actions to deal 
with this situation. 
Measures adopted by Sri Lanka
The policies that Sri Lanka pursued even before the eruption of the financial crisis and the fact 
that Sri Lanka’s financial institutions did not trade in collateralised debt instruments, helped to 
minimise the direct impact of the financial crisis, particularly on the domestic financial system. 
Sri Lanka has been introducing prudential policies from time to time, drawing from industry best 
practices worldwide. Many of these policies were in line with the Basel I and subsequently the 
Basel II Accord, which Sri Lanka adopted to strengthen financial sector stability. 
Policies that were implemented before the global financial crisis include the imposition of 
single borrower limits, necessity for obtaining entity rating for commercial banks from an approved 
credit rating agency, imposing general provision on performing loans and advances, making credit 
ratings mandatory for issues of all varieties of debt instruments, which exceed a certain limit, 
limiting commercial banks’ foreign borrowings, taking measures to formalise bank supervision 
activities and to educate banks on the management of risks, stringent enforcement of corporate 
governance directions, restricting foreign ownership of Treasury bills and bonds, re-capitalisation 
of state banks by the government to build up public confidence in state banks, gradu ally building 
up official reserves and investing external reserves with highly rated international instruments and 
secure institutions.
When foreign investors were liquidating their investment in government securities, the 
CBSL considered that it was prudent to provide foreign exchange to the market to meet the demand 
and maintain exchange rate stability. In order to face such situations, the CBSL had built up its 
reserves when the exchange rate was floating, and adopted a number of prudential measures to 
ease the pressure on the exchange rate to depreciate. Accordingly, all licensed commercial banks 
were directed not to effect any pre-payments of import bills and obtain a 100 per cent margin on 
the import value for any letters of credit (LCs) opened for selected categories of imported  items, 
while raising the existing margin deposit requirement for the importation of motor vehicles to 
200 per cent. Further, forward contracts for the sale and/or purchase of foreign  exchange was 
limited only for a period up to 180 days, and several prudential measures to limit the demand for 
PDFPAGE43
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
32
credit for certain non-essential categories of imports were introduced with a view to preventing 
excessive volatility in the domestic foreign exchange market. Meanwhile, the CBSL continued to 
provide US dollar liquidity with a view to mitigating excessive volatility in the domestic foreign 
exchange market, which resulted in a shortfall in rupee liquidity. The rupee liquidity concern 
was addressed by reducing SRR, purchasing Treasury bills and continuously providing liquidity 
through Reverse Repos, which was facilitated greatly by the declining trend observed in inflation.  
When the foreign reserve position became a difficult issue, particularly in early 2009, 
the uncertainty about the country’s external position increased and many predicted a significant 
BOP crisis and the collapse in the entire economy. Nevertheless, identifying the importance 
of addressing uncertainties and achieving stability, the CBSL took a number of initiatives to 
strengthen the external position. These included the arrangement of swap facilities with central 
banks in the region to build up the reserves, execution of promotional programme on Treasury 
bills and bonds among the Sri Lankan Diaspora and migrant workers to encourage them to invest 
in Sri Lankan government securities, payment of a bonus interest on interest earned on NRFC and 
RFC deposits to encourage repatriation of foreign exchange earnings by Sri Lankans abroad and 
passing of an amendment to the Inland Revenue Act by Parliament to provide tax concessions 
on foreign income and profits earned through providing services to non-residents.  In order to 
build up reserves to comfortable levels as those that prevailed in mid 2008 and build up investor 
confidence, a Stand-by Arrangement (SBA) facility with exceptional access was requested from 
the IMF. Subsequently, the IMF on 24 July 2009, approved a 20-month SBA facility of US dollars 
2.6 billion, which is equivalent to 400 per cent of the country’s current quota, to strengthen Sri 
Lanka’s reserve position.
The government also introduced a Rs. 16 billion stimulus package to help the industrial 
sector to withstand the deteriorating external environment. Sri Lanka had taken the decision of 
passing-through the oil prices early. Meanwhile, the absorption of foreign exchange to strengthen 
foreign reserves continued. 
In order to strengthen the financial sector, a number of measures were introduced, which 
included resolving the distress situation of a commercial bank that threatened financial system 
stability, safeguarding registered finance companies and restoring public confidence in the entire 
financial system with the timely intervention of the CBSL, and containing the emerging bubble in 
local financial markets by taking pre-emptive measures. 
The communications policy of the CBSL was also influential in restoring confidence against 
uncertainties. As 2008 and 2009 were extremely challenging years, the CBSL gave high prior ity 
to the communication of its policy actions with a view to aligning the expectations of market 
participants with the policy stance of the CBSL and improving the efficiency of the monetary 
policy transmission mechanism. Hence, the communication activities of the CBSL played a 
pivotal role in managing expectations and speculations of different stakeholders. In particular, the 
communication activities were intensified to arrest the possible crisis situation while maintaining 
high standards and accuracy. 
PDFPAGE44
Stability in the Midst of Uncertainty
33
Summary of Major Adverse External and Internal Shocks Faced by Sri Lanka
Period Type of Shock Remarks
Mid 1960s BOP crisis The BOP crisis was triggered by low export prices and 
a high volume of imports. In order to maintain export 
competitiveness, Sri Lanka devalued the rupee on 22 
November 1967. A Foreign Exchange Entitlement Certificate 
system was introduced in 1968 in an attempt to ease the 
pressure on BOP.
1973-74 First oil price shock The BOP was adversely impacted and exchange control 
restrictions were tightened further. Inflation increased sharply.
1979-80 Second oil price shock BOP and domestic prices were impacted adversely.
1983-2009 Internal conflict The country had huge losses in terms of human lives, 
human suffering and economic benefits that could have been 
achieved during the 26 year conflict period.
1990 Gulf crisis Sri Lanka was affected by the Gulf crisis in 1990, although it 
caused relatively a short period of high oil prices. 
1997 Asian financial crisis As the country’s capital account was not fully liberalised, 
there was no significant contagion effect due to this crisis.
2001 Multiple shocks including 
prolonged drought, 
attack on Bandaranaike 
International Airport, 
September 11 attack in the 
USA and other issues
Sri Lanka moved to an independently floating exchange rate 
regime in January 2001.
The economy recorded a negative growth for the first time in 
the post independence history.
2004 Tsunami disaster The impact in terms of the loss of human lives, and damage to 
infrastructure and livelihoods was huge and the reconstruction 
and rehabilitation needed significant effort.
2005 End of Multi-fibre  
Agreement (MFA)
Larger firms were able to shape their industry with global 
trends. However, small and medium entreprises became 
vulnerable.
2007/2008 International commodity  
price increase 
The commodity prices, including oil and food, increased 
to unprecedented levels causing point-to-point inflation to 
increase to 28.2 per cent in June 2008.
2008/2009 Global financial crisis The investors in government securities wanted to withdraw 
their investments and the government made the due payments 
in full, without any default. Foreign exchange reserves 
depleted to a minimum level.
2009/2010 Global economic recession As a consequence to the deceleration in domestic economic 
activities and international trade related activities, economic 
growth in 2009 slowed down. However, with the end to 
the internal conflict in May 2009, the economy recovered 
strongly since the latter part of 2009, which is still continuing.
PDFPAGE45
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
34
-300
-100
100
300
500
USD mn
700
900
1,100
0
200
400
600
800
1,000
1,200
1,400
1,600
1,800
Inflows (LHS) Outflows (LHS) Outstanding- Face Value (RHS)
Jan-08
Feb-08
Mar-08
Apr-08
May-08
Jun-08
Jul-08
Aug-08
Sep-08
Oct-08
Nov-08
Dec-08
Jan-09
Feb-09
Mar-09
Apr-09
May-09
Jun-09
Jul-09
Aug-09
Sep-09
Oct-09
Nov-09
Dec-09
Chart 3.1
Foreign Investments and Withdrawals of the 
Government Securities
Chart 3.2
Gross Official Resrves and Months of Imports
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Dec-08
Jan-09
Feb-09
Mar-09
Apr-09
May-09
Jun-09
Jul-09
Aug-09
Sep-09
Oct-09
Nov-09
Dec-09
USD bn
No. of months
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Gross official reserves (LHS) Months of imports (RHS)
PDFPAGE46
Stability in the Midst of Uncertainty
35
The end to the prolonged internal conflict in May 2009 resulted in a significant turnaround of 
many uncertainties that prevailed in the economy. The new post-conflict environment, which had 
been established in the country with peace, is characterised by lower uncertainties and improved 
confidence about the future of the country. This has been complemented by the approp riate 
monetary and fiscal policies, aimed at further strengthening the newly gained improvements. The 
peaceful environment has been instrumental in improving investor confidence and particularly 
instrumental in improving the country’s external position.
Conclusion
Sri Lanka has been able to maintain stability in the midst of uncertainties caused by adverse shocks 
that it had to face from time to time during the last 60 year period. The country has been able to 
achieve an average growth rate of 4-5 per cent during the last 6 decades while improving living 
standards of the people considerably. Among the many shocks, the most critical and challenging 
was the twin crises during the 2008-2010 period. When taking measures to avoid uncertainties 
and stay strong, the way Sri Lanka responded, particularly to the global financial crisis, rev eals a 
number of lessons for small economies like Sri Lanka. The strengthening of the economy in good 
times and creating space for future flexibility, developing ability to move quickly and decisively,  
reading early signs of vulnerabilities in major economies, practising “Long Termism” instead of 
“Short Termism”, using several policy initiatives and implementing them simultaneously, central 
banks working closely with the political authorities, and being conscious of the law of unintended 
consequences are among them. These would be important lessons to follow in the future as well 
when dealing with uncertainties to achieve stability.
References
Central Bank of Sri Lanka. 40th Anniversary Commemorative V olume. Colombo: Central Bank of Sri Lanka, 1990.
---. Annual Report, Various Issues.
---. Economic Progress of Independent Sri Lanka. Colombo: Central Bank of Sri Lanka, 1998.
PDFPAGE47
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
36
PDFPAGE48
37
Evolution of the Conduct of Monetary 
Policy in Sri Lanka
Ms. S.M. Wimalasuriya
Senior Economist, Economic Research Department
Overview
On the 28th of August 1950, the Central Bank of Ceylon 1 was established to succeed the Board of 
Commissioners of Currency as the monetary authority of independent Ceylon. The powers of the 
Board of Commissioners of Currency were limited to the automatic issue of Ceylon rupee notes 
and coins against an equivalent value of assets in foreign currency, and the converse process of 
retiring such notes and coins whenever the Board was required to pay out of its foreign exchange 
reserves. In contrast, as a central bank, the Central Bank of Ceylon could issue currency and 
create deposits against foreign as well as domestic assets. In addition, a central bank also has the 
power to control the expansion and contraction of credit granted by commercial banks and other 
financial intermediaries. These powers are vested with a central bank by law, given the significant 
role of money in an economy and hence the need to influence and control money circulatin g in 
the economy. Accordingly, with the establishment of the Central Bank in August 1950, Sri Lanka 
gained monetary sovereignty.
Conduct of monetary policy by the Central Bank to influence and control monetary 
conditions in the country has changed over the past sixty years in step with the progress of the 
country’s economy, and in particular, with the progress of the financial sector. While the set of 
1 Later, on 31 st December 1985, the Bank was renamed the ‘Central Bank of Sri Lanka’.
4
PDFPAGE49
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
38
monetary policy instruments and procedures adopted by a central bank constitutes its operational 
framework, in the case of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka, the procedures adopted for the conduct 
of monetary policy have undergone significant change over the past sixty years. Monetary  policy 
instruments used by the Bank include policy interest rates, open market operations, statutory 
reserve ratios, and moral suasion. Direct control of interest rates and credit has also been 
exercised by the Bank in the past, from time to time. However, the Bank’s reliance on market-
based policy instruments has increased considerably during the last two decades. In the meantime, 
as is the practice globally, communication is increasingly used by the Bank to manage inflation 
expectations of the public and thereby reinforce its monetary policy.
The principles governing the operations of central banks globally have changed in keeping 
with the evolution of monetary economics as well as in response to significant economic events. 
Global trends in central banking, in turn, have naturally had a bearing on the shaping of domestic 
monetary policy. Streamlining objectives of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka in 2002, to maintaining 
economic and price stability, and financial system stability, demonstrates that the Central Bank of 
Sri Lanka has moved in step with the progress of modern central banking.
Monetary Policy directed at securing Monetary Stability 
and Economic Development
Since its inception until 2002, the Bank was guided by multiple objectives. As the  
authority responsible for regulating and administering the monetary and banking system in 
Sri Lanka, the Central Bank was charged with the responsibility of regulating the supply,  
availability, cost, and international exchange of money, so as to secure the following objectives: 
(a) stabilisation of domestic monetary values; (b) if there has been a determination of the par 
value of the Sri Lanka rupee, the preservation of the par value of the Sri Lanka rupee and the 
free use of the rupee for current international transactions; (bb) if there has been no determination 
of the value of the Sri Lanka rupee, the preservation of the stability of the exchange rate of the 
Sri Lanka rupee in relation to foreign currencies; (c) the promotion and maintenance of a high 
level of production, employment, and real income in Sri Lanka; and (d) the encouragement and  
promotion of the full development of the productive resources of Sri Lanka. In designing monetary 
policy, greater weight has been placed by the Central Bank on stabilising domestic monetary 
values during certain periods while at other times, the development objective has received greater 
weight.
During much of the period since the Bank’s establishment till the mid-1950s, markets were 
liquid, owing mainly to the favourable performance of exports and the resulting inflows of foreign 
exchange. In 1956 therefore, the Central Bank issued Central Bank securities for the first time,  
for the purpose of mopping up excess market liquidity, given that its holdings of government 
securities were not adequate for conducting open market operations. Thereafter however, balance 
of payments deficits coupled with increased government borrowing led to tight market liquidity 
PDFPAGE50
Evolution of the Conduct of Monetary Policy in Sri Lanka
39
conditions by 1958, which compelled commercial banks to borrow funds from the Central Bank 
to meet their temporary liquidity requirements. While commercial banks were allowed to obtain 
funds from the Central Bank by rediscounting their holdings of Treasury bills, the Central Bank 
also lent funds to commercial banks against the pledge of government securities, at the Bank 
Rate, a policy interest rate that was extensively used by the Central Bank till the mid-1980s, along 
with the statutory reserve ratio (SRR) 2.
Economic development was given precedence in formulating monetary policy during the 
period from the late 1950s until the early 1980s. During this period, the Central Bank exercised 
direct control on credit as well as interest rates with the intention of directing resources to 
selected sectors of the economy, primarily with a view to promoting industrial growth and rural 
development, while maintaining monetary stability. During the 1960s as well as in the 1970s, 
until 1977, monetary policy instruments were used to support the policy of import substitution 
too.
Given the selective treatment of different sectors of the economy during the period 
from the late 1950s until the early 1980s, the Bank adopted a similar approach to managing 
inflationary pressures too. Accordingly, although the Bank rate and the SRR were raised in the 
early 1960s, when confronted with rising inflationary pressures, exemptions were made in respect 
of refinancing facilities made available by the Central Bank to commercial banks in relation to 
‘priority’ sectors of the economy. Credit ceilings imposed in respect of ‘non-priority’ sectors as 
well as cash margins imposed on letters of credit in relation to selected non-essential imports 
were also among the monetary policy measures taken during the early 1960s, when inflationary  
pressures were rising. 
In the mid-1960s, the Central Bank made available refinance facilities to credit institutions 
through its Medium and Long-Term Credit Fund, which was established in 1964, to aug ment the 
availability of long-term funds. During the period from April 1966 to November 1968, these funds 
were made available at 3 per cent for the promotion or development of industry or agriculture, 
although the Bank rate was at 5 per cent from 28 th May 1965 to 6 th May 1968, having been raised 
from 4 per cent, at which level it had remained since 13 th August 1960. In the late 1970s and the 
early 1980s, the Bank acted in a somewhat similar manner in trying to control rising inflationar y 
pressures following a significant expansion of credit. In view of rising demand pressures, since 
December 1979, refinance facilities made available by the Central Bank to commercial banks over 
and above a stipulated quota had been subject to a graduated scale of penal rates. The stipulated 
quota of refinancing facilities granted at the Bank rate consisted of general accommodation and 
export credit refinancing. With inflationary pressures intensifying, in April 1980, the Central Bank 
raised the Bank rate from 10 per cent to 12 per cent, while at the same time raising the penal 
2  The statutory reserve ratio (SRR) applicable to demand deposits and the SRR a pplicable to time and savings deposits were unified 
in 1987. The SRR applicable to foreign currency denominated deposits pla ced abroad was removed in 1997. Since 4 th August 
2000, the SRR is applicable only to rupee denominated deposits.  
PDFPAGE51
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
40
rates from a range of 15 - 25 per cent to a range of 20 - 30 per cent. While this tight monetary 
policy stance was continued into 1981, in 1981, the amount of export credit refinancin g made 
available by the Central Bank at the Bank rate was increased while its general accommodation 
at the Bank rate was reduced. In June 1981, the Central Bank raised the SRR in respect of both 
demand deposits as well as savings and time deposits, to bring down the level of excess market 
liquidity, while in August 1981, it raised the Bank rate by two percentage points to 14 p er cent 
while at the same time raising the penal rates on Central Bank accommodation to commercial 
banks to a range of 21 to 30 per cent. However, export credit refinancing continu ed to be granted 
at 12 per cent, the level at which the Bank rate had been maintained before it was raised to 14 
per cent. Further, while growth of total credit granted by commercial banks to the private secto r 
was to be contained to 25 per cent in 1981, as per the National Credit Plan, which was introduced 
to guide the allocation of credit among different sectors, exports, along with industry, agriculture 
and tourism, were considered priority areas by the Central Bank when formulating the National 
Credit Plan for 1981, and hence were given special weight when allocating shares in total credit 
granted to the private sector and government corporations.
With the adoption of ‘open economy’ policies from 1977 however, the Central Bank 
gradually moved away from direct controls to market based tools of monetary policy. The Bank 
has also actively engaged in financial market development, that is, development of financial 
institutions, financial instruments, as well as payment and settlement systems. Nevertheless, the 
SRR applicable to deposit liabilities of commercial banks, which is administratively determined, 
continued to be a key monetary policy instrument used by the Central Bank to control inflationary 
pressures in the economy during the 1980s and early 1990s. Development of the domestic 
financial sector enabled the Central Bank to adopt open market operations as a key monetary 
policy tool from the late 1990s.
Broad Money - M2
The 1980s saw a significant change in the parameters within which the Central Bank conducted 
monetary policy. While the Central Bank had monitored the movements of narrow money 
(M1) for the purpose of formulating monetary policy since its inception until 1980, the Central 
Bank commenced compiling broad money (M 2) in 1980, to use as a guide for monetary policy 
decisions. M 2 includes currency and demand, savings and time deposits denominated in rupees, 
held by the public with commercial banks, whereas narrow money (M 1) includes only currency 
and demand deposits denominated in rupees held by the public with commercial banks. The 
decision to broaden the definition of the monetary aggregate used for monetary policy p urposes 
was based on the fact that developments in the financial sector had resulted in savings and time 
deposits becoming more liquid. For example, the relaxation of restrictions on the withdrawal of  
funds from savings accounts had diluted the distinction between savings and demand deposits 
while facilities for premature withdrawal of time deposits and borrowing against the security of 
time deposit had rendered time deposits more liquid.
PDFPAGE52
Evolution of the Conduct of Monetary Policy in Sri Lanka
41
Monetary Targeting
A fundamental change with respect to the conduct of monetary policy during the 1980s was that 
the Central Bank adopted the monetary targeting framework for monetary policy. Accordingly, 
the Central Bank commenced preparing a monetary programme annually, which was to guide 
monetary policy. The monetary programme is prepared in accordance with the expected 
developments with respect to key macroeconomic variables, namely, the balance of payments, 
the budgetary outcome, gross domestic product (GDP) growth, and inflation. Following the 
determination of the average money multiplier (ratio of broad money to base money, i.e., reserve 
money) for the relevant year, a target for base money is stipulated, so as to achieve the targeted 
growth of broad money, which had been derived on the basis of the anticipated GDP growth and 
inflation during that year. Monetary policy is then conducted to maintain reserve money at th e 
desired level.
The Central Bank continues to operate within a monetary targeting framework for monetary 
policy. The continued presence of a systematic link between broad money and inflation enables 
the Bank to do so. In the meantime, steps have been taken to continuously refine the monetary  
policy operations of the Bank within the monetary targeting policy framework. A policy decision 
taken in this direction in recent years was that, from 2008, targets for both broad money and 
reserve money are to be stipulated in terms of the annual average growth, rather than in terms 
of the growth as per the end-period levels in any two consecutive years concerned. This is a 
more disciplined approach to guiding monetary conditions in the country, as the impact of any 
temporary developments that could lead to short-term volatility in monetary aggregates is thereby 
largely eliminated.
Broader Monetary Aggregates - M2b and M4
Progressive steps taken by the Central Bank have enlarged the scope for disciplining the 
course of money and hence inflation in the country. From around the mid-1990s, the Central 
Bank commenced compiling monetary aggregates with a broader coverage, so as to capture 
the movement of money circulating in the economy with greater accuracy. The economic 
liberalisation that took place since the late 1970s and the parallel development of the financial 
sector warranted the coverage of a broader set of financial instruments in computing broad money. 
Accordingly, from 1996, M 2b, which includes demand, savings and time deposits denominated 
in foreign currency, held by the public with commercial banks, in addition to currency and 
demand, savings and time deposits denominated in rupees held by the public with commercial 
banks included in M 2, has been used to guide monetary policy. M 2b reflects the operations of 
the offshore banking units (OBUs) of commercial banks in addition to those of the domestic 
banking units (DBUs) of commercial banks and the Central Bank, which are covered by M 2. 
Meanwhile, in 1999, the Central Bank began compiling M 4, that is, broad money computed on 
the basis of the financial survey, which has a wider coverage than the monetary survey cond ucted 
for the purpose of compiling M 2b. M4 includes savings and time deposits held by the public with 
PDFPAGE53
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
42
specialised banks and finance companies, in addition to currency and demand, savings and time  
deposits denominated in rupees as well as foreign currency, held by the public with  
commercial banks, included in M 2b. While it is observed that the course of M 4 has continued to 
closely follow that of M 2b, mainly due to the fact that commercial banks continue to dominate the 
financial sector in Sri Lanka, the Central Bank continues to use M 2b to guide monetary policy. 
Accordingly, the monetary programme has also been prepared to guide the course of M 2b, since 
1998.
The Policy Interest Rate Corridor
A fu rther significant development during the 1990s was the introduction of the Repurchase 
facility by the Central Bank in October 1993. Accordingly, the Central Bank would enter into 
overnight repurchase agreements with institutions participating in the monetary operations of the 
Central Bank at the Repurchase rate, from October 1993, by way of absorbing excess market 
liquidity on an overnight basis. Given the large inflows of capital during the early 1990 s and the 
accompanying build-up of excess market liquidity, the Repurchase rate was introduced to prevent 
a sharp fall in the overnight money market rates. Initially, the Repurchase rate was fixed at one per 
cent less than the weighted average yield on 3-month Treasury bills at the previous auction, given 
that the underlying securities involved in repurchase transactions are Treasury bills. Subsequently 
however, the Bank established the practice of setting the Repurchase rate taking into consideration 
such factors as the overall liquidity conditions in the market and other economic conditions.  
In November 1995, the Central Bank introduced a reverse repurchase facility to stabilise 
call money rates, which showed a tendency to rise to unacceptably high levels in view of the 
prevailing shortage of market liquidity. Institutions participating in the monetary operations of 
the Central Bank could therefore borrow from the Central Bank on an overnight basis whenever 
they encountered a deficit in their funds required for daily operations. However, this f acility was 
discontinued in January 1996, as it had not succeeded in stabilising market interest rates, partly 
due to structural weaknesses in the market as well as the limited amounts of funds offered. The 
reverse repurchase facility was re-introduced in November 1998, to make available funds to 
commercial banks and primary dealers, that is, participants in the monetary operations of the 
Central Bank, on an overnight basis. Following the re-introduction of the facility in Nov ember 
1998, funds were made available at the Reverse Repurchase rate, without any limits on the 
amounts so lent, provided government securities were offered as collateral. The re-introduction of 
the facility served as an assurance to the market that stability in interest rates would be preserved. 
Since then, the Repurchase rate (Repo rate) and the Reverse Repurchase rate (Reverse Repo rate) 
constitute the benchmark floor and ceiling, respectively, for call money rates. Hence, these policy 
interest rates indicate the monetary policy stance of the Central Bank.
PDFPAGE54
Evolution of the Conduct of Monetary Policy in Sri Lanka
43
Legal Mandate and Institutional Framework for  
Monetary Policy
A noteworthy development in respect of monetary policy during the decade ending 2010 is the 
amendment to the Monetary Law Act by Parliament in December 2002. It redefined the objectives 
of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka as (a) economic and price stability, and (b) financial system 
stability, with a view to encouraging and promoting the development of the productive resources 
of Sri Lanka. As such, it gives greater flexibility to the Central Bank in conducting monetary 
policy.
In 2001, the Bank’s Monetary Policy Committee was established, with a view to expanding 
the scope of policy discussions in relation to monetary policy. Its mandate is to review the Bank’s 
monetary policy stance on a monthly basis and recommend to the Monetary Board the appropriate 
monetary policy measures to be adopted, given the outlook for domestic economic conditions. 
Subsequently, the Bank also began issuing monthly press releases on monetary policy decisions, 
in accordance with an advance release calendar. In 2007, the Bank established the Monetary 
Policy Consultative Committee, with a view to broadening its dialogue in relation to monetary 
policy with private sector agents. These measures as well as the launching of the ‘Road Map’ for 
monetary and financial sector policies to be implemented, at the beginning of each year, since 
2007, have helped the Bank enhance its communication with the public in relation to monetary 
policy.
Implementing Monetary Policy - Active Open Market 
Operations
A significant development with respect to the implementation of monetary policy by the Central 
Bank was the introduction of active open market operations (OMO) in March 2003. Beginn ing 
March 2003, the Central Bank discontinued the standing facility for the outright purchase or sale of 
government securities, at its Discount and Re-Discount rates. Since then, the Central Bank would 
conduct auctions for the outright sale of government securities or Central Bank securities or the 
outright purchase of government securities, totalling a pre-determined amount, only if it considers 
it necessary to absorb or inject liquidity on a permanent basis, so as to maintain market liquidity 
at a level compatible with the targeted path for reserve money. Further, since March 2003, th e 
Bank conducts OMO Repurchase (Repo) auctions or OMO Reverse Repurchase (Reverse Repo) 
auctions, if it considers it necessary to absorb or inject a pre-determined amount of liquidity on 
an overnight or term basis, in order to stabilise overnight rates in the call money market at a level 
considered appropriate within the policy rate corridor so as to be able to achieve reserve money 
targets. Meanwhile, to fulfil any further liquidity requirements, participating institutions could 
access the Bank’s standing facilities for Repurchase and Reverse Repurchase transactions, which 
are made available at the Bank’s Repurchase rate and Reverse Repurchase rate. 
PDFPAGE55
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
44
From around December 2006 till May 2009 however, the Central Bank deviated from the 
practice of conducting active OMO, with a view to quickly arresting the growing demand for 
credit and the use of the Central Bank’s funds to feed the demand for credit at the time, given 
that monetary expansion was already too high and inflation was increasing rapidly. During this 
period, the Central Bank restricted access to its funds by limiting access to its reverse repurchase 
facility. During the period from January to March 2007, access to the Central Bank’s rev erse 
repurchase facility by banks was restricted to six times per calendar month, and subsequently, 
until August 2007, participating institutions were allowed to access this facility only three times 
per calendar month. In order to ease the considerable pressure on market interest rates, restrictions 
on access to the Central Bank’s funds through the reverse repurchase facility were removed at 
the end of August 2007. However, in view of the mounting demand pressures in the economy, 
the number of times that participating institutions could access the Central Bank’s funds through 
its reverse repurchase facility was restricted again from December 2007 and these restrictions 
remained effective until May 2009. Meanwhile, in 2008, the Central Bank tightened its monetary  
policy stance further by stipulating stringent targets for reserve money in terms of daily average 
reserve money, rather than in terms of end-period levels as has been the practice up to then. 
In addition, a penal rate of interest was charged by the Central Bank on its reverse repurchase 
transactions during the period from 3 rd December 2007 to 21 st May 2009, whenever participating 
institutions exceeded the stipulated number of times that they were allowed to borrow at the 
Reverse Repurchase rate. Also, while the Penal rate was in force, the Bank refrained from 
conducting OMO reverse repo auctions. These contractionary monetary policy measures resulted 
in domestic market interest rates rising significantly. Consequently, credit and other monetary 
aggregates decelerated markedly in 2008, thus helping prevent the second-round effects of sharp 
increases in international commodity prices at the time from becoming more broad-based. While 
the Central Bank was thus able to bring down inflation to manageable single-digit levels early in 
2009, it therefore removed restrictions on access to its funds by May 2009. Meanwhile,  as the 
average weighted call money rate, which was contained to levels below the Penal rate following 
its introduction, declined to levels within the policy interest rate corridor formed by the Repo rate 
and the Reverse Repo in March 2009, the Penal rate of interest on reverse repos was gradu ally 
lowered from January 2009 and removed in May 2009. Its removal reinforced th e policy interest 
rate corridor.
Alongside the policy interest rates and OMO, the Central Bank uses the SRR as a key 
monetary policy instrument, to manoeuvre its monetary policy stance and market liquidity 
conditions. For example, the SRR was reduced on three occasions in the aftermath of the onset 
of the recent global financial crisis, to offset the sharp decline in liquidity in domestic financial 
markets. However, the SRR is no longer a frequently used monetary policy instrument, as the 
Bank now relies more on market oriented policy instruments such as the policy interest rates, 
which are reviewed monthly by the Bank, and OMO, to guide market liquidity conditions. 
Moral suasion meanwhile, continues to be a monetary policy instrument used by the Bank at its 
PDFPAGE56
Evolution of the Conduct of Monetary Policy in Sri Lanka
45
discretion. The Bank rate, which is now applicable to lending by the Central Bank in its capacity 
as the lender of last resort, is also amongst the policy tools at the disposal of the Central Bank, but 
it is rarely in effect and does not necessarily reflect the monetary policy stance of the Bank.
Concluding Remarks
The Central Bank of Sri Lanka has taken progressive steps over the past years to increase 
its effectiveness in maintaining price stability and thereby create a stable macroeconomic 
environment that would foster economic growth and development. The Bank is now of the view 
that it should move from its current monetary targeting framework for monetary policy to an 
inflation targeting policy framework in the years ahead, so as to be able to maintain price stability 
on a more sustainable basis. However, there are several pre-requisites to be fulfilled before 
moving to an inflation targeting regime. Hence, the Bank will continue its efforts to strengthen the 
framework for monetary policy within which it operates, by way of progressing towards a more 
effective regime for monetary management.
References:
Central Bank of Sri Lanka. Annual Report, Various Issues.
---. Economic Progress of Independent Sri Lanka. Colombo: Central Bank of Sri Lanka, 1998.
Exter, John. Report on the Establishment of a Central Bank of Ceylon: Sessional Paper No.XIV: Ceylon Government, 
1949.
Government of Ceylon. “Monetary Law Act No. 58.” 1949.
Karunathilake, H.N.S. The Banking and Financial System of Sri Lanka  Colombo: Centre for Demographic and Socio-
Economic Studies, 1986.
---. Fifty Years of Central Banking in Sri Lanka 1950-2000 . Colombo: Centre for Demographic and Socio Economic 
Studies, 2000.
Wijewardena, W.A. “Monetary Policy Instruments.” 40th Anniversary Commemorative V olume of the Central Bank of 
Sri Lanka. Colombo: Central Bank of Sri Lanka, 1990. 
PDFPAGE57
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
46
PDFPAGE58
47
Introduction
Economic prosperity of any country is dependent on a safe, vibrant and active financial system, 
and its financial institutions. A stable financial system will lead to sustainable development of 
the economy due to efficient channelling of financial resources for investment purposes, mainly 
through improved confidence. Hence, to promote investments as well as to harness the potential 
of the economy, a sound, efficient and trustworthy financial system is of paramount importance.  
The financial system of a country plays the very important intermediation role of 
transmitting money between savers and borrowers and it consists of a set of closely interconnected 
financial markets, instruments, services, institutions and infrastructure. An efficient payment and 
settlement system, which enables the transactions in the financial sector to be cleared and settled 
on time, is another important component of a financial system. The regulator, which plays th e 
important role of regulating and monitoring the system to ensure the stability, is considered an  
integral part of a financial system.
Financial system stability can be defined as the system’s ability or resilience to withstand 
pressures from within and outside and continue to function smoothly. Why is the stability o f the 
financial system important? Firstly, a stable financial system would create a trusted environment 
The Role of the Watchdog – 
Strengthening Financial Regulation in 
Sri Lanka
N.W.G.R.D. Nanayakkara
Additional Director, Bank Supervision Department
5
PDFPAGE59
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
to savers and inves tors. Secondly, it would help to attain the price stability objective through the 
transmission of monetary policy. Thirdly, a stable condition in the financial system would support 
investment and growth through efficient financial intermediation. Fourthly, a stable financial 
system would improve the distribution of resources in the economy efficiently and effectively. 
Financial system stability does not happen automatically. It has to be established and 
maintained. The stability of the financial system depends on a combination of several prerequisites 
viz. (i) a stable macroeconomic environment, (ii) a well governed liquid and solvent grou p of 
financial institutions, (iii) an efficient financial market, and (iv) a safe and reliable payment and 
settlement system. These prerequisites are highly interconnected and an incident that affects 
only one area initially can subsequently have adverse implications for a range of other factor s, 
eventually destabilising the overall financial system. 
Financial institutions, which represent a major part of the system, are exposed to various 
risks in the processes of financial intermediation. The major categories of risk are – credit, 
liquidity, interest rate, foreign exchange rate, operational, legal, regulatory, reputational etc. As the 
financial markets grow in sophistication in terms of the instruments and the way in which these 
transactions are processed, the above mentioned risks tend to increase. Therefore, an independ ent 
institution to perform the watchdog’s role to monitor and regulate these risks at micro and macr o 
levels is needed for the development and the stability of the financial system. Hence, the Central 
Bank of Sri Lanka has been chosen to perform the abovementioned independent role. 
A sound and a well governed group of financial institutions and a safe and reliable 
payment and settlement system can be achieved only through comprehensive laws and prudential 
regulations. Past experiences have proved that voluntary observation of prudential regu lations 
does not work. Therefore, an effective supervisory framework is needed for mandatin g to ensure 
uniformity. Effective supervision would help to closely monitor all aspects of potential instability 
and to ensure enforcement.
Evolution of the Regulatory Regime of the Central Bank  
“Banking is an economic activity which affects the public welfare to an unusual degree: it 
touches in one way or another, almost every phase of a country’s economic life. Soun d banking 
is essential to healthy and vigorous economic development. Supervision of banks helps to pr otect 
the public against mismanagement, bank failures, and loss of confidence in the banking system. 
It helps to protect depositors and stock-holders against loss and frequently enables bank d irectors 
and officers to manage the affaires of their banks more wisely and intelligently.” 1 
The ‘Monetary Law Act No. 58 of 1949’ made it mandatory for the Central Bank to 
administer, supervise and regulate the monetary, financial and payment system of Sri Lanka. 
However, the financial regulations introduced by the Central Bank during the period from 1960 to 
 1 John Exter’s Report on the Monetary Law Act
48 
PDFPAGE60
49
The Role of the Watchdog – Strengthening Financial Regulation in Sri Lanka
1978 were mainly focused on commercial banks’ rate of interest on advances, supply of credit to 
various sectors within the economy and adoption of monetary measures to conserve the foreig n 
exchange resources available to the country for essential purposes. In addition, the Central Ban k 
had played a key role in developing the financial markets during the period from 19 77 to about 
1985 by introducing foreign currency banking schemes, encouraging new foreig n banks to open 
branches in Sri Lanka and establishing regional rural development banks. 
Year 1988 has been a remarkable year for the regulatory regime as the Central Bank had 
been able to put in place and operate a procedure for the licensing of persons carryin g on banking 
business for the regulation and control of matters relating to the business of banking th rough the 
implementation of the Banking Act No. 30 of 1988. In the same year, the Finance Companies A ct 
No.78 of 1988 was also enacted to provide for the control and supervision of  finance companies. 
Implementation of the Credit Information Bureau (CRIB) in 1990 and requiring all licensed 
banks and non-bank financial institutions to provide credit information and sharing same w ith 
the stakeholders of CRIB has been another regulatory measure that has helped in uplifting the 
regulatory regime of the country. 
The Banking Act gave authority to the Central Bank to issue prudential regulations/
directions to licensed banks for reasons to be stated in writing to any one or more of them 
regarding the manner in which any aspect of the business such bank or banks is to be conducted. In 
exercising the above mentioned powers, the Central Bank has been able to upgrade its regulatory  
regime in par with the international regulatory regimes and best practices by implementing several 
important prudential regulations to ensure that the conduct of an individual bank will no t have 
implications on the stability of the overall financial system. Selected key financial regulations 
adopted by the Central Bank during the three decades from 1980s are summarised below. 
(a) Maintenance of risk weighted minimum capital adequacy ratio (March 1989)  –
Credit risk is the biggest risk exposure of a bank, which will have direct implication 
on the profitability, liquidity and solvency. Accordingly, the Central Bank, in line with 
the requirements laid down by the Banking Regulation and Supervisory Practices 
Committee, also known as the Basel Committee, has formulated these regulations 
directing towards assessing capital in relation to credit risk (the risk of counterparty 
failure) to assess overall capital adequacy of a licensed bank. 
(b) Maintenance of liquid assets (April 1989) – Liquidity-  the ability to fund increases 
in assets and meet obligations as they become due - transcends the individual bank 
since a liquidity shortfall at a single bank can have systemic repercussions. Therefore, 
the Central Bank through these regulations made it mandatory for licensed banks to 
maintain liquid assets ratio, on an ongoing basis, over the prescribed liabilities.  
(c) Suspension of interest on non-performing advances and classification of bad 
and doubtful debt for provisioning purposes (August 1997) –  Since there was no 
uniform practice observed by licensed banks with regard to the suspension of interest 
PDFPAGE61
50
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
accrued but uncollected on non-performing advances and classification of advances for 
provisioning purposes, these mandatory prudential norms were introduced to establish a 
common standard for income recognition and loan loss provisioning, which would be in 
line with the accepted international best practices. 
(d) List  of qualified auditors (April 1998)  – The Central Bank having regard to the need 
to ensure that experienced and qualified auditors are engaged in auditing accounts of 
licensed banks, has transmitted a list of selected qualified auditors to audit the accounts 
of licensed banks. 
(e) Publication of audited annual accounts (June 1998)  – Since there was no uniform 
format observed by licensed banks with regard to the publication of their audited 
financial statements and minimum disclosure, the Central Bank has prescribed the form 
of the Balance Sheet and Profit & Loss Account together with minimum disclosure 
requirements in line with the Sri Lankan Accounting Standards for licensed banks to 
comply with. 
(f) Limitation on ownership in share capital in banks (October 1988)  – In order to 
avoid licensed banks from being owned and controlled by a selected group of people 
and undue influence by such investors on the manner in which banking businesses are 
conducted, the Central Bank imposed limitations on maximum ownership in shares of 
licensed banks by individuals/companies and their close relatives/related companies 
individually or in aggregates to ensure soundness of the banking system.
(g) Single borrower limit (October 1999)  – The objective of these regulations was to limit 
accommodation granted to a single borrower to a predetermined level of capital funds 
of the lending bank with a view to avoid credit risk concentration of the bank and also  
by all banks to a single borrower.   
(h) Customer due diligence  – Know Your Customer procedures (December 2001) – In 
order to prevent unchecked use of the financial system for money laundering and 
transactions related to terrorism and subversive activities, the Central Bank had issued 
these guidelines on customer identification at the time of opening an account for a 
prospective customer or before establishing a business relationship with a prospective 
customer or thereafter when there is a material change in an account operated. These 
guidelines are also expected to provide protection against possible frauds, and enable 
timely recognition of suspicious transactions and protect the bank from reputational, 
legal and financial risks.
(i) Code of corporate governance for banks and other financial institutions (June 2002) 
- In view of the growing concerns on financial instability resulting from inadequate 
corporate governance, the Central Bank felt that it was necessary to formulate a national 
consensus for corporate governance as one of the critical pillars of the national financial 
PDFPAGE62
The Role of the Watchdog – Strengthening Financial Regulation in Sri Lanka
51
architecture for economic development through improved performance of banks and 
financial institutions. With the financial assistance of the working group on corporate 
governance of the Commonwealth Secretariat funded by Commonwealth Fund for 
Technical Co-operation, the National Task Force on Corporate Governance in the 
Banking and Financial Sector constituted with eminent and influential professionals, 
was setup by the Central Bank in May 2001 as an initial step towards promoting 
corporate governance at national level. 
The National Task Force on Corporate Governance in the financial sector had been able 
to put in place the above code of corporate governance. Even though the princip les and 
guidelines set out in the Code of corporate governance were not intended to be treated 
as regulations, they were expected to be treated as standards of conduct by the financial 
institutions to maintain the integrity and stability of the financial system. 
The publication issued by the Commonwealth Secretariat on “Review of Corporate 
Governance in the Banking and Financial Sector in Sri Lanka” (December 2000) 
suggested that the Central Bank of Sri Lanka leas the inauguration of a comprehensive 
national strategy in applying and promoting corporate Governance in a systematic 
manner. 
(j) Inter-Regulatory Institutions Council (2007) – In order to strengthen existing 
regulatory framework, monitor systemic risks of financial conglomerates and to 
facilitate consolidated supervision the Inter-Regulatory Institutions Council (IRIC) 
was setup. Current membership of IRIC includes representatives of the Central Bank, 
Insurance Board of Sri Lanka, Securities & Exchange Commission, Colombo Stock 
Exchange, Office of the Registrar of Companies, Institute of Chartered Accountants of 
Sri Lanka and Office of the Commissioner of Co-operative Development. 
(k) Directions on mandatory corporate governance for banks (2007)  – In view of the 
importance of proper governance in banks for the overall banking sector stability, which 
is fundamental to the financial system stability, the Central Bank has issued directions 
on mandatory corporate governance to improve and sustain the corporate governance 
processes and practices of banks. The corporate governance processes and practices 
referred to in the above mentioned directions are deemed to be the management 
framework that facilitates the conduct of the banking business in a responsible and 
accountable manner. These mandatory corporate directions have been formulated based 
on eight core principles as follows:
(i) The board of directors should assume the overall responsibility and accountability 
for the management of affaires of the bank, i.e. conduct of business and 
maintenance of prudential risk management mechanisms, and safety and 
soundness of the bank.
PDFPAGE63
52
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
(ii) The composition of the board shall be in such manner that the element of 
independence and required skills levels are reflected in the overall strategic 
decision making process. 
(iii) Only the persons deemed fit and proper to hold office as directors of a bank shall 
be appointed to the board.
(iv) There should be clear demarcation between corporate governance and corporate 
management so that the board members do not involve in day to day management 
of affairs of a bank.
(v) Overall strategic policy direction and governance should be the area coming 
under the chairman and the board whereas day to day management of business 
and risk rest with the chief executive officer. 
(vi) In order to ensure strict oversight while maintaining impartiality, board is 
expected to appoint its subcommittees with specific terms of reference.
(vii) Transactions with related parties shall not grant such parties more favourable 
treatments than that accord to other constituents. 
(viii) Information relating to the business and risk management of banks should 
be disclosed in a transparent manner so that the market discipline would be 
promoted. 
(l) Asset bubbles and requirement for additional provisions (2006)  - With a view 
to bring about an extra capital cushion during the financial and economic stress and 
mitigating any possible threat to the banking industry and thereby the financial system, 
the Central Bank required licensed banks to maintain a general loan loss provision of 
1% against performing loans and loans in the special mentioned category. This proactive 
measure of the Central Bank had proven to be a well though prudential measure and 
had the desired effect on licensed banks during the global financial turmoil.  
(m) Dealing with failed banks and finance companies (2008)  - Weak banks and non-bank 
financial institutions pose a continuous challenge for bank regulators worldwide. Bank 
failures cause huge indirect and direct costs to the economy. Such failures not only 
shrink economic values of assets and businesses but also jeopardise stability and public 
confidence in the financial system. Thus, the objective of these guidelines was, at best, 
to prevent the occurrence of weak banks or, at least, to reduce its harmful effects to the 
economy. On the basis of the experience gained in handling weak financial institutions 
in 2007 and 2008 the Central Bank has put in place a mechanism consists of the 
techniques for identifying weak banks and financial institutions, corrective measures to 
PDFPAGE64
The Role of the Watchdog – Strengthening Financial Regulation in Sri Lanka
53
turn around those institutions and resolution and exit strategies for such failed financial 
institutions on solo basis, based on “Supervisory guidance on Dealing with weak 
Banks” evolved by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision.
(n) Risk management relating to foreign exchange business (2009)  -  These directions 
have been issued to standardise and strengthen foreign exchange risk management 
guidelines in licensed commercial banks and increase their soundness, thereby 
strengthening financial system stability. 
(o) Mandatory Deposit Insurance (2010) - The Sri Lanka Deposit Insurance Scheme 
(SLDIS) was implemented to protect small depositors from failure of financial 
institutions, to promote small-depositor-confidence and in the interest of the overall 
financial system stability of the country. Under the provisions of the Monetary Law 
Act, SLDIS came into effect from 1 October 2010 with an initial capital of Rs.1.1 
billion provided by the Central Bank. The members of SLDIS, i.e. licensed banks and 
registered finance companies, are require to pay annual premium ranging from 0.10% to 
0.15% p.a. on a monthly/quarterly basis. SLDIS is distinctly separate from the Central 
Bank. 
(p) Cap on interest rates (2010)  - In view of the slow progress shown by banks in reducing 
risk premia added to lending rates in response to the improved macro economic 
performance and stability since early 2009, the Central Bank required all banks to take 
urgent measures to reduce interest rates on housing loans and credit card advances to at 
least 14 per cent per annum and 24 per cent per annum, respectively, by end of Octo ber 
2010. The Central Bank further required banks to reduce lending rates on other loans 
and advances by around 1-2 per cent per annum.
(q) Minimum capital requirement and cap on liabilities and profits for non-compliant 
finance companies (2011) - The Central Bank has observed several issues in common 
relating to few non-bank financial institutions within two business groups during the 
period from 2007-2010. These common features had resulted in negative capital and 
accumulated losses in those companies. Having acted on time, the Central Bank made 
it mandatory for registered finance companies at all times maintain an unimpaired 
minimum capital. Further, regulatory sanctions, including cap on total amount of 
deposits and debt and prohibition of payment of dividend, until the minimum capital 
requirement is complied with, have been enforced against registered finance companies 
that have failed to ensure the compliance with the above requirement.   
Note: (a) Most of the early dated regulations have been revised or amended s ubsequently  
  in line with domestic or international developments
 (b) Financial regulations were initially aimed at the activities of ban king  
  institutions. However, with the failure of non-bank financial i nstitutions in  
  late 1980s, most these banking sector regulations were customised  to develop  
  a regulatory regime covering the activities of non-bank financial insti tutions. 
PDFPAGE65
54
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
Present Regulatory Framework
The Central Bank has been a continuous promoter of the development of the financial system 
of the country. Thus, the regulatory framework of the Central Bank, which has evo lved over the 
past six decades, provides a comprehensive institutional setup for the three pillars of stability 
i.e. governance, risk management and compliance, in regulated banks and non-bank finan cial 
institutions and payment and settlement systems. 
Governance is self-discipline. It is the process that facilitates the conduct of businesses 
of regulated entities, i.e. licensed banks and non-bank financial institutions, in a responsible and 
accountable manner so as to promote the safety and soundness of individual financial institutions, 
thereby leading to the stability of the overall financial system. 
Corporate governance and corporate management are of critical importance for the smooth 
functioning of regulated financial institutions. The two are constantly depending on each oth er. 
Well-structured channels of communication, accommodation of valuable inputs from each are 
essential for efficient and effective functioning and growth of licensed financial institutions. 
While appreciating the significance of the aforesaid cohesive character of the governance and 
management, the regulatory experience of the Central Bank highlighted the urgent need for 
demarcating the areas of responsibility, authority and accountability of the governance distinct 
from that of the management. Further, it has been observed that governance and management 
stepping into each other’s area has been a root cause of many malpractices developing, persisting 
and proving detrimental to the interest of depositors, creditors and other stakeholders. I n view of 
the foregoing, the Central Bank has introduced the Mandatory Corporate Governance fo r licensed 
financial institutions in December 2007.
The Central Bank recognises the need for having in place a set of prudential norms covering 
major risks to ensure that individual financial institutions are not vulnerable to any of these risk s. 
Therefore, a comprehensive set of prudential norms, covering all major risks, has been d eveloped 
to be strictly adhered to by all regulated financial institutions. In order to ensure compliance w ith 
the above mentioned prudential norms on an ongoing basis by licensed financial institutions, th e 
Central Bank has put in place a robust ongoing monitoring system (Continuous Supervision ) 
based upon periodic regulatory returns submitted by regulated institutions. Additionally, a risk 
based statutory examination process has been in place to identify risks, manage these risks and 
assesse the adequacy of resources to mitigate these risks and the compliance of licensed financial 
institutions with statutory requirements, applicable laws and regulations, internal controls and 
the standards of corporate governance. Matters relating to non-compliance with prudential 
requirements of weaknesses and deficiencies in the financial condition, controls and systems of 
financial institutions are brought to the notice of its Board of Directors, by the Central Bank to 
ensure that timely corrective action is taken.
PDFPAGE66
55
The Role of the Watchdog – Strengthening Financial Regulation in Sri Lanka
 Compliance relates to the need for regulated financial institutions to independently ensure 
compliance with applicable laws and prudential regulations of the Central Bank. The Central 
Bank requires compliance to emerge from an ongoing board-level engagement for execution of 
business processes designed to manage risks and to continuously benchmark against expected 
parameters/tolerance levels applicable for the entire industry, laws, regulations, international best 
practices, internal policies and procedures. Recently, the Central Bank extended its regulations 
relating to compliance to cover specific areas such as operations of money laundering and terrorist 
financing.
The financial regulations of the Central Bank only provide minimum parameters based on 
international best practices. Thus, financial institutions have the operational flexibility in evolving 
own more stringent parameters, compatible with the Central Bank’s regulatory regime, their 
balance sheet profile and complexity of operations and expertise, to mitigate any potential adverse 
impact of the risk category under consideration. 
PDFPAGE67
56
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
PDFPAGE68
During the pre-Central Bank period, the financial system of the country was rudimentary and 
fragmented. Issue of Ceylon rupee notes and coins under the Currency Board System (CBS)  was 
limited only to the extent of Indian rupees in possession or lodged with the Reserve Bank o f 
India. This provided a self balancing mechanism to the balance of payments as any additions 
or reductions of reserves were accompanied by respective expansion or contraction of curr ency 
issues. As the financial market of the country was shallow and narrowly based, market activities 
were limited with low public involvement. Although the self balancing CBS seemed to have 
facilitated a reasonably smooth financial market during the pre independence era, the newly 
gained independence demanded a completely new monetary structure mainly on incompatibility 
issues.1 The creation of the Central Bank was expected to provide the flexibility to achieve rapid 
and sustained economic expansion and the full employment of resources.   
The influence of the Central Bank on the economic activities and financial markets of the 
country is not only through the basic functions entrusted upon it by the law but also through 
enormous powers that it has for liquidity creation almost at will. Since the inception, the Central 
Bank’s ability to create money and liquidity in the system has had a significant influence on 
the financial market of the country. The measures adopted by the Bank to stabilise the financial 
Surviving in White Waters – 
Stabilising Domestic Financial Markets
R.A.A. Jayalath
Director, Domestic Operations Department
1 Between relatively rigid nature of the CBS and flexibility in the systems deman ded by the newly gained status to maintain 
independent monetary policy to suit changing conditions and the nee ds of the new country.
57 
6
PDFPAGE69
58 
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
markets in the country during the last 60 years resemble a closer relationship to the changing 
economic landscape and policies adopted in different economic regimes. This paper identifies 
and reviews the following specific periods, which reflect different approaches to financial market 
stabilisation in Sri Lanka: (a) Liberal Economic Era: 1950 – 1959; (b) Controlled Regime: 1959 
– 1977; (c) Open Economy – Early Stage: 1977 – 1988; and (d) Open Eco nomy – Mature Stage: 
1988 – to date.
Market Stabilisation in Liberal Economic Era: 1950 – 1959
During its first decade since the establishment, the economic environment was reasonably liberal 
and the focus was more on economic growth with a reasonable level of price stability. Export 
growth, promotion of food production to substitute the dependence particularly on  rice imports 
had been considered the main drivers of growth. The Central Bank relied more on conv entional 
monetary policy instruments in achieving price stability. Since banking activities were limited to 
a wealthy few and conventional products, the real challenge was not emanating from the risk of  
instability in the financial market but was mainly from inadequacy of the system and initiatives to 
cater to widening needs of the economy and its agents. 
The Korean War and the subsequent tea boom resulted in a massive accumulation of external 
assets by the country. The resultant monetisation had encouraged increased financial market 
activities and spending. A very high level of monetary expansion challenged the Central Bank 
with the threat of eroding the value of the Sri Lankan rupee. With excess liquidity, a p otentially 
dangerous base for creation of excessive credit, the major thrust of the Central Bank was to h ave 
the appropriate policies in place to prevent the inevitable overheating of the economy.
Consequently, the country witnessed several changes to the Statutory Reserve Requirement 
(SRR), increased forward exchange (purchase) rates and introduction of working balance 
(exposure) limits on foreign currency operations of banks. Restrictions in the form of ceilings 
on commercial bank credit and the accommodations at Bank Rate were introduced in 1950 and 
revised on a few occasions during this period. The Central Bank went beyond the conven tional 
policy measures and allowed commercial banks to invest their foreign currency balances abroad 
creating a corresponding temporary outflow to ease the impact on the rupee liquidity. Thou gh the 
increase in external assets was temporary, the exchange rate was kept unchanged assigning the 
entire burden to be absorbed by the monetary policy. The resultant new excess liquidity in  the 
market required the Central Bank to engage in a variation of open market operations by issu ing 
its own securities. Despite these, efforts were visibly drawn on offering subsidised credit and new  
welfare programmes. Consequently, Korean War surpluses were sufficient only to finance import 
requirements of the country for a period of 13 months. By 1953, excess reserv es of commercial 
banks had fallen to Rs. 26 million and the contraction in money supply allowed the Central Ban k 
to reduce the SRR on demand deposits back to its original 10 per cent.
The period after 1955 witnessed a sharp fall in the country’s external assets exerting a 
destabilising force on its Balance of Payments (BOP). Failure of the country to reinvest such 
surpluses in the productive sector aiming at sustainable economic development resulted in 
PDFPAGE70
59
Surviving in White Waters – Stabilising Domestic Financial Markets
evaporation of these surpluses leading to severe BOP problems later on. Low interest rates 
maintained seemingly to ease budgetary problems of the government resulted in negative real 
interest rates encouraging consumption and discouraging savings. In the absence of bank failures, 
volatile interest rates resulted from uncontrolled market liquidity and inconsistent economic 
policies became the main market de-stabilisers during this period.
Market Stabilisation in the Controlled Regime: 1959 –1977
By 1959, Sri Lanka was experiencing its first post-independence BOP difficulties. There were 
large issuances of government securities due to the expanding budget deficit and liquidity position 
of commercial banks was insufficient to absorb them. The Central Bank absorbed a substantial 
portion of the Treasury bills issued by the government (over 80 per cent of th e Treasury bills 
issued) in addition to providing temporary advances of 10 per cent of the estimated go vernment 
revenue (Rs. 133 million in 1959) injecting substantial liquidity into the system. The Bank 
Rate was used by the Bank to contain the demand. However, there was an intervention by the 
government in an interest rate decision of the Central Bank for the first time in the history 2 in the 
wake of rapid increase in interest rates in response to its increased demand for funds. Under the 
circumstances, selective import and credit controls were introduced to abate the pressure on the 
external position3 and the country opted to draw Rs. 53.8 million from the International Monetary 
Fund (IMF) to face the deterioration in external assets. 
Up to about 1962, the country had enjoyed a relative stability in price levels. However, th e 
government borrowing through Treasury bills to finance its budget deficit continued un abated.4 
The Bank rate continued to guide the market interest rates and central bank credit continued to be 
the major source of monetary expansion exerting upward pressure on prices. In this en vironment, 
SRR continued to be a major instrument of influencing the market demand though its application 
was not uniform5. New credit controls 6 in effect for demand management resulted in deceleration 
in money supply leading to relative price stability again in 1966. However, the Central Bank’s 
thrust on its development objective to drive agricultural production possibly to relieve pressure on 
foreign exchange for the food imports, reduction of interest rates on various r efinancing facilities, 
etc. even in the presence of inflationary government financial operations, prior to allowing th e 
economy to cool down to an appropriate level, seemed to have reignited a higher increase in the 
price level soon after in 1967. 
2 The Government directed the Monetary Board to bring down Bank Rate from three per cent to two and a half per cent in 1959, the 
first and only time in history.
3 Import coverage in gross official assets of the country had fallen below th ree months of imports for the first time in the history of 
the Bank in 1961 and the decline continued till 1964. 
4 By 1963 the statutory limit on Treasury bills was Rs. 1150 million while the amount held by the Central Bank was Rs. 1006.9 
million and the budget deficit which stood at just Rs. 1.2 million in 1956 increased to Rs. 1366 million by 1972. 
5 Different SRR were applicable for different types of deposit accounts while state banks were provided with preferential treatment.
6 Credit controls include restriction of bank credit to a pre determined level (e.g. loans for purchase of estates were limited to one 
third of purchase price of such assets) with the exception of credit granted to priority sectors. 
PDFPAGE71
60 
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
With continued decline in the country’s external asset position 7, the Sri Lankan rupee was 
devalued by 20 per cent in 1967 and a system of multiple exchange rates through op eration of 
Foreign Exchange Entitlement Certificates (FEECs) was introduced in 1968 8. Liberalisation of 
imports under the new exchange rate environment resulted in a substantial increase in the demand 
for credit and the Central Bank continued with credit at subsidised rates 9. GDP growth has 
witnessed its highest ever in the decade at 8.3 per cent. The impact of demonetisation of large 
value currency notes in 1970, though helpful in curtailing the monetary expansion,  was short 
lived. Credit ceilings, increases in SRR and Bank Rate were visible in the subsequent period but 
subsidised credit by the Central Bank distorted the effective cost of credit and resource allocation 
continuously. Low increase in CCPI 10(1.2 per cent) prompted the Central Bank of Sri Lanka 
(CBSL) to ease its monetary policy stance further in 1976. However, by that time money supp ly 
was showing a phenomenal increase 11. Consequently, monetary policy was further tightened by 
withdrawing the accommodation of vault cash of commercial banks in computation of SRR, a 
facility extended to ease the pressure on their credit creating ability. 12  
Market Stabilisation in the Open Economy – Early Stage: 
1977-1988
With the opening of the economy in 1977/78, significant changes were introduced to r elieve 
the economy from a host of administrative controls and inefficient resource allocation. Multiple 
exchange rates applicable under FEECs were abandoned and the Monetary Law Act was amended 
to introduce a managed floating exchange rate system. The Bank Rate was increased significantly 
to better align it with economic fundamentals while removing controls in market interest rates. 
Penal rates on CBSL accommodations 13 were increased substantially. Preferential credit 14 
was rationalised with new interest rates at 15 – 25 per cent. Ceiling on credit to government 
corporations was withdrawn. As an incentive to foreign investments, offshore banking facilities 
were introduced to facilitate and complement the activities of export processing zones. The CBSL 
moved away from direct controls to market based tools to implement monetary policy. 
7 Country’s external asset position declined to an extremely critical level of little more than one month of imports at the end of 1966.
8 Under this scheme, a substantially depreciated exchange rate was ap plicable for exporters of nontraditional products and most 
other foreign exchange earners and for essential imports creating a multiple exchange rate system.  
9 Bank Rate remained at five per cent but refinancing facilities by the Cen tral Bank at rates as low as one and a half per cent had 
aggravated the preferential and directed interest rate structure which was misa ligned (substantially lower) with the market interest 
rates while lowering the effectiveness of Central Bank actions.
10 Colombo Consumers Price Index that measures the level of increase in pric e levels i.e. inflation. 
11  Money supply increased almost in three fold during 1973 – 1977 with bulk increase in 1976/77 with 34.9 % in 1976 and 29% in 
1977.
12    This was introduced in 1962 to accommodate a fraction of vau lt cash holding by commercial banks and changed in 1968 to 
accommodate entire such holdings in SRR computations. 
13    Penal rates are Interest rates higher than market interest rates charged  by the CBSL for its accommodations to the participating 
banks beyond specified limits with a view of discouraging frequent request for such funding by the participants.
14     These facilities were provided under various refinance schemes of the CBSL. These rates were revised to align them with market 
rates and thereby minimise (or reduce) distortions in the interest rates.
PDFPAGE72
61
Surviving in White Waters – Stabilising Domestic Financial Markets
Consumer inflation averaged at 26 per cent with domestic credit providing the main thrust 
in 1980 while recording a growth of 23 per cent in money supply and GDP growth of 5.5 per cent. 
Call money rates were as high as 25 per cent. Bank credit was set to govern through the natio nal 
credit plan placing more emphasis again on directed lending. Entry of money brokers in  1982 
added a new dimension to market liquidity, information availability, transparency, and transacting 
ease. Fiscal imbalances caused from ambitious long gestation investment without much regard to 
the domestic resource constraints had been the major contributor of financial market instability in 
the early stages of the new era. Public investments which averaged eight per cent during 1970 -77 
had grown to 15 per cent in 1978-83.15 Financial Market development became an important part of 
the CBSL activity and development of new instruments and new institutions had a bearing on its 
decisions.16 Although continued aid flow and high export prices enabled the country to maintain 
a higher foreign reserve position during 1977/78, the government resorted to heavy borrowings 
abroad in the subsequent period. In 1983 a BOP crisis resurfaced compelling the countr y to resort 
to a temporary BOP support facility from the IMF. 17 
The low cost central bank refinancing credit continued throughout with exports related 
credit dominating (95 per cent) bank credit in 1984. The year 1985 recorded the lowest consumer 
price inflation after 1978, an achievement through tightening monetary policy mechanism, 
quantitative restrictions on accommodations at the Bank rate with gradually increased penal rate 
for accommodations beyond the given quota supported by fiscal consolidation though sh ort lived. 
Irrespectively, the excess liquidity remained high due to newly imposed credit ceilings.
In terms of market activities, the capital market failed to reflect any significant growth. 
As such the activities of the share market were streamlined in 1984 under the Colombo Stock 
Exchange. V oluntary deposit insurance scheme introduced by the CBSL in 1987 to provide a safety 
net for the most vulnerable segment of the depositors of the regulated deposit taking institutio ns, 
received weak market acceptance for multiple reasons. Irrespective of these developments, Sri 
Lanka experienced the first major instability in its financial system during 1986 – 1988 with th e 
failure of a number of finance companies and this situation resulted in substantial strengthening of 
regulatory and legal framework. 18
The liberalised policy package introduced in 1977 alone proved insufficient for achieving  
sustainable high growth. Weaknesses in the external sector due to non harmonised monetary and  
15 Total investments had grown from 16 per cent to 28 per cent of G DP in respective periods. 
16 Insurance companies, finance companies, specialised financial institution s such as merchant banks, venture capital companies, 
investment trusts, brokerages, etc as well as debt securities, OMO, structured instruments, technological development etc were all 
assisted in expansion of financial market activities. 
17 A facility of SDR 100 million was launched in mid 1983. However,  this was abandoned in 1984 after utilising only about 50 
per cent of the committed funds as favourable international commodity pric e cycle rescued the country from the difficulties that 
prevailed. By this time the current account deficit had declined from 19. 8 per cent to 3.6 per cent of GDP. 
18 This has resulted in the introduction of the Banking Act No 30 of 198 8 and the Finance Companies Act No 78 of 1988. 
PDFPAGE73
62 
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
fiscal policies seemed to have reduced the flexibility in managing foreign reserves. Repetition 
of external shocks and resorting to IMF facilities testifies to the absence of willingness and 
commitment in making necessary structural adjustments, once the external situation normalised. 
Although the managed exchange rate released slightly lower pressure to foreign exchange market, 
significant volatility in the external reserve position and sporadic inflation increases caused 
significant volatility in the market interest rates. 
Market Stabilisation in the Open Economy – Mature Stage: 
Post 1988
The period commenced with a severe BOP crisis that witnessed a sharp drop in foreign currency 
inflows and reserves. Although large increases in net credit to government (NCG) 19 facilitated 
the temporary bridging of government expenditure gap in the domestic front, dwind ling foreign 
reserves made local banks unwilling to open LCs even for essential imports as their foreign 
counterparts were refusing to honour them without specific foreign currency backing. In the midst 
of ongoing civil unrest, the local banks seemed to have exhausted all the available credit lines 
by then. The CBSL had to intervene and arrange several short term financing facilities from its 
counterparts on an uncovered basis by pledging its limited asset base to ensure continued flowing  
of at least essential imports to the country. In this environment, a broader reform agenda was 
needed to resurrect the falling economy. The country had resorted to Compensatory Finan cing 
Facility and Structural Adjustment Facility from the IMF to concentrate on much needed structural 
adjustments in the economy in 1988 and 1989. 
Secondary market trading of Treasury bills was introduced to facilitate increased liquidity 
and ease of trading in government securities, an introduction that led to broader acceptance of 
government securities by the market participants. Technological and process improvements, 20 
transparency of the transaction processes and information availability had provided broad er 
support for increased securities market activities while being instrumental in reducing lead time in 
transaction processing and settlement, facilitating around the clock financial services. Divestiture 
of the ownership of state enterprises reduced inefficiencies in the fiscal front while reducing the 
pressure on BOP. Consequently, the period of 1988 - 1989 witnessed the first conscio us effort to 
reduce the Treasury bill holdings of the CBSL and reduce the level of monetary financing. 21 Slow 
growth in reserve money resulted from low government borrowing from the banking system (only 
Rs. 54 million in 1989) and the gradual improvement in the money market ensured the su ccess 
19 NCG by the CBSL increased by 34 per cent while that from commercia l banks increased by eight per cent during 1988 alone.
20 Automated transaction processing, ATMs, plastic card technology (credit c ards), cheque clearing (Sri Lanka Automated Clearing 
House-SLACH) and transaction processing were the significant introductions during the period.
21 The share of CBSL holdings in total Treasury bills outstanding declined from 88 per cent in January 1988 to 57 per cent in 
December 1988 while Treasury bills on issue increased from 15 per cent of GDP to 20 per cent of GDP during the period.
PDFPAGE74
63
Surviving in White Waters – Stabilising Domestic Financial Markets
in Open Market Operations (OMO). Debt Recovery Act of 1990 ensured faster debt recovery  but 
not without questions on fairness. Establishment of the Credit Information Bureau was a major 
step towards information integration and accessibility. The period witnessed the restructuring 
of a troubled bank and the country joining a global instantaneous transaction link. 22 Creation of 
appropriate infrastructure for development and stability of the capital market were among the 
major contributions for market development during the period. 23
The period from 1990 to 1994 witnessed steady and continuing foreign exchange inflows 
to the country supported by buoyancy in commodity export prices, recovery of  tourism, 
better utilisation of foreign assistance and structural adjustment measures adopted to improve 
economic performance. As a result, the external assets of the banking sector showed a significant 
improvement together with improved external reserves, BOP position and private investments. 
Credit control mechanism, which was in place since 1989, was eliminated while refinance 
facilities available from very early stage under the Medium and Long Term Credit Facility of 
the CBSL was suspended, removing impediments for the CBSL to rely completely on market 
based indirect instruments for monetary policy management. Expansion of SRR to cover foreig n 
currency deposits and further revision to the SRR rate was helpful in bringing down in flation in 
1994 – 95. By 1995, though private investment was high, escalating government exp enditure 
resulted in a budget deficit of 10 per cent of GDP. The BOP reverted to overall deficit while 
showing a significant expansion in bank credit. 
The bomb blast at the CBSL in 1996, though it caused substantial physical damage, did 
not create any instability in the financial market. Introduction of Reverse Repurchase transactions 
(together with repurchase transactions introduced in 1993), activation of interest rate corrid or and 
streamlining primary dealer system were instrumental in increasing the orderliness and stability 
of the market interest rates. Higher interest rates and SRR were required to address the increasing 
threat of credit growth and inflation. 
Introduction of commercial paper (a short term corporate borrowing instrument) and 
long term government bonds were helpful in filling market gaps and bringing flexibility to  the 
financial markets. The period witnessed several significant changes in the operating environment 
including, shifting to an `independently floating exchange rate regime, linking net open position of 
commercial banks to prudential limits by basing it on capital and reserves of banks and permitting 
22 Suspension and restructuring of the operations of the local branch of Ba nk of Credit and Commerce International (BCCI) by the 
CBSL, following the collapse of its worldwide operations without any significant imp act on domestic financial system in 1991 
while instantaneous transactions and settlements were made possible by the c ountry joining the Society for Interbank Financial 
Telecommunication (SWIFT) in 1993.
23 Introduction of Share Investment External Rupee Accounts (SIERA) to facilitate n onresident investments in shares of 
domestically listed companies, establishment of Securities and Exchange Comm ission (SEC) for regulation and direction of 
capital market activities, creation of Central Depository System (CDS) to facilitate spee dy and secure transaction settlement 
and facilitation of Unit Trusts to enhance participation of small investors in sec urities markets had contributed significantly in 
creating appropriate infrastructure.
PDFPAGE75
64 
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
non-residents to invest in US dollar denominated government securities. The establishment of 
a clearing institution (Lankaclear), Real time Gross Settlement System (RTGS) and Scripless 
Securities Settlement (SSS) system enhanced the operating ease, reliability and stability of the 
transactions, payments and, settlement functions. The operations of the CBSL were restructured 
and streamlined to suit the changing economic environment by concentrating more on over all 
focus. Creation of several dedicated departments and two important internal committees namely 
Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) and Financial System Stability Committee (FSSC) on the 
lines of international best practices were important milestones of strategic refocus of the CBSL 
activities on stability. 
Despite these positive developments, weak fiscal discipline and external vulnerability 
remained the main causes of instability in the financial market that required external assistance 
(Chart 6.1). Efforts of the CBSL kept the financial market volatility in check, though in intermittent 
periods with limited consistency. As in the past, the period following the external shock, domestic 
financial markets as well as the economy reflected movement towards relative stability. However, 
reversal to monetary expansion preceded lasting stability in most instances refilling threat of 
inflation and volatility in market interest rates keeping economic growth range bound.
The period prior to the global economic crisis witnessed very high commodity prices 
including petroleum and crude oil. The civil conflict had also created an unprecedented demand on 
the country’s external resources for its requirement on import of implements for counter terrorism 
-20
-14
-8
-2
4
10
16
22
28
34
40
1950
1953
1956
1959
1962
1965
1968
1971
1974
1977
1980
1983
1986
1989
1992
1995
1998
2001
2004
2007
Per cent
Chart 6.1 Inflation, GDP, Money Supply,  BOP, Fiscal Position and Call Rates 1950-2009
RT IMF D: OF EFFA CFF+SAF SBA SBA
Money 
Supply 
Growth
GDP Growth
Budget Balance % of GDP
InflationCall RatesBOP  
Deficit 
Periods 
(overall 
Balance)
Year
Chart 6.1
Inflation, GDP, Money Supply, BOP, Fiscal Position and Call Rates 
1950-2009
PDFPAGE76
65
Surviving in White Waters – Stabilising Domestic Financial Markets
activities. Consequently, the country was facing a very large trade deficit. On top of this, the 
intensification of global economic slowdown with liquidity crisis in 2007/8 resulted in reversal of  
external financial flows meant mainly for investment in rupee denominated government securities 
and other portfolio investments. Interventions by the CBSL prevented faster depreciation o f 
the exchange rate of the rupee, but with drastic reduction in external assets. Global credit crisis 
prevented further lending by overseas banks and dried down almost all the foreign currency credit 
lines available to domestic banks. In the domestic market interbank money market almost dried 
down on concerns on viability of some smaller/weaker domestic banks. The CBSL responded 
by addressing concerns in the rupee market through a multitude of measures to strengthen the 
banking system, collateral values and market liquidity directly and indirectly. Reduction of 
SRR and purchase of Treasury bills by the CBSL released substantial amount of liquidity to the 
banking system. Removal of restrictions on Reverse Repurchase facility improved the access 
of the banking system to liquidity. In the foreign exchange front, the CBSL prov ided liquidity 
support for needy banks by way of placing foreign currency deposits domestically an d lending in 
foreign currency on other acceptable collateral, even going beyond the conventions.    
Decline in property prices created a dent in the asset and collateral valuations hitting hard 
on property linked investments and loan portfolios. At the same time, few registered businesses 
were illicitly accepting deposits in disguise offering very high interest rates. Businesses of realtor 
services and financing were affected. Delinquencies and non performing components on the loan  
portfolios of banks were on the increase. These developments encouraged investors to shif t from 
yield to quality. The first casualty was those illicit deposit takers and finance company deposit 
takers. However, the shock was manageable except in a few cases where a domestic bank and a 
few other financial institutions related to a business conglomerate having significant exposures in 
such sectors were involved. 
Concerns about the related business conglomerate that was in a highly leveraged 24 
operating environment and stressed finance companies in the group, on to which the bank in the 
group had substantial exposure triggered a run on its deposits though the financial po sition of the 
bank in general remained sound. The CBSL intervened and exercised its powers vested under 
the Monetary Law Act and removed the directorate immediately and vested the operations with 
the largest state commercial bank with a new directorate with vast banking related experience. 
A host of other related exercises initiated by the new board involving its employees under the 
guidance of the CBSL prevented further downturn and re-established the depositor confid ence. 
Involvement of a large state commercial bank was helpful in reducing credit concerns of the ban k 
involved. The CBSL provided the necessary temporary liquidity on extended collaterals durin g 
the period until market doubts cleared off.  
24 High debt financing compared to substantially small equity (ownership) fin ancing facilitated due to highly exaggerated cross 
holding (inter-company holding) structure.
PDFPAGE77
66 
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
Further the interventions by the CBSL in introducing financing facility to establish a floor 
price for real estate assets/securities and other liquidity support prevented a broader calamity in 
the financial market and restored public confidence. Interbank market fell short of liquidity an d 
extreme risk aversiveness with visible reluctance to lend, both in foreign exchange and rupee. 
The CBSL provided liquidity in both the markets until normalcy was restored. However, all 
these measures were taken amidst a worsening BOP position aggravated by an expanding current 
account deficit and world liquidity and credit crunch forced borrowing difficulty. Th e CBSL 
ventured out of convention and established a few foreign currency swap lines with friendly central 
banks in the region and regional financial clubs. To avert an impending BOP crisis, the cou ntry 
resorted to the IMF for a facility under a Stand-By Arrangement. By then, the world h ad shown 
signs of recovery from the deepest slowdown since the Great Depression. 
Almost simultaneous cessation of civil conflict created new foreign investor demand for Sri 
Lanka government securities on relatively high domestic interest rates, resulting in an unprecedented 
excess liquidity in the market. Stand-By Arrangement with the IMF was unprecedented in terms 
of size (US dollars 2.6 billion) and was instrumental in re-establishing much needed investor 
confidence and was instrumental in alleviating concerns on future payment capability and 
disciplined economic management. Tight monetary policy pursued by the CBSL together with 
freed up domestic production, decline in external trade and low international commodity prices 
helped in reducing domestic inflation to mid single digit level resulting in a significant decline in 
market interest rates. Yields of government securities reflected a speedier adjustment. Challenged 
with the excess liquidity and low demand for credit by the private sector, the CBSL employed all 
conventional tools at its disposal for liquidity absorption. OMO were intensified with increased 
frequency and volume. Instrument cluster was increased by introduction of new instruments su ch 
as foreign exchange swaps to supplement OMO. Operational environment was further relaxed 
by lowering official interest rates, SRR and by removing a host of exchange control restriction s. 
Although the daily liquidity in the interbank market was brought down to a manageable level, the 
CBSL is saddled with continued cost of sterilisation not months but years ahead. Market seems 
to have convinced that stability in the economic environment will be maintained from here as 
reflected in the falling yields (already in single digit) of longer dated government securities (fiv e 
and ten years).
Domestic foreign exchange market is showing regained stability after long years of 
depreciation with rupee appreciation over two per cent during the year upto September 201 0. 
Although the corporate bond market is yet to emerge, the share market has shown a significant 
and continuous growth in the past few months. Money market rates are already below or ar ound 
official rates and bank lending rates were on a declining trend. Assets of the financial institutions 
almost equalled the GDP compared to just around four per cent in 1948, showing decad es of 
maturity and growth. Still the budget deficit remains high with continued financing though 
at a lower scale by the CBSL. Stabilising financial markets in the past six decades resembles 
manoeuvring in roaring white waters, but the journey is not finished yet; the future cou ld at times 
PDFPAGE78
67
Surviving in White Waters – Stabilising Domestic Financial Markets
be more tiresome and challenging, but courage, commitment and correct application would draw 
success. From here, the challenge for the country would be to move out of cyclical instability by 
moving onto a high growth path with proper regard to the potential capacity and stability  of the 
economy. Stable financial markets would provide impetus for such an end and beyond.  
References:
Athukorala, Premachandra, and Sarath Rajapatirana. “The Domestic Financial Market and Trade Liberalisation Outcome: 
The Evidence from Sri Lanka.” World Bank Policy, Research, and External Affairs Working Papers No.WPS 590 
(1991).
Central Bank of Sri Lanka. 40th Anniversary Commemorative V olume. Colombo: Central Bank of Sri Lanka, 1990.
---. Annual Report, Various Issues.
---. Economic Progress of Independent Sri Lanka. Colombo: Central Bank of Sri Lanka, 1998.
James, William E. “International Finance and Domestic Financial Market Development: The Case of Indonesia.” Asian 
Development Review 14.1 (1996): 86-105.
Karunathilake, H.N.S. Fifty Years of Central Banking in Sri Lanka 1950-2000. Colombo: Centre for Demographic and 
Socio Economic Studies, 2000.
PDFPAGE79
68 
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
PDFPAGE80
The Monetary Law Act (MLA), under which the Central Bank of Ceylon was established in 1950, 
placed with the Bank the responsibility of the preservation of the par value of the Ceylon rupee 
and the free use of the rupee for current international transactions. Following the collapse of 
the fixed exchange rate arrangements under the Bretton Woods system globally, an amendment 
to the MLA placed with the Bank the responsibility of maintaining the par value or when no  
determination of such par value has been made, maintaining such exchange arrangements as 
consistent with the underlying trends in the country and relate its exchange with other curren cies, 
as to assure its free use for current international transactions. The MLA also requires the Bank to 
maintain international reserves adequately to meet any foreseeable deficit in the BOP to maintain 
the international stability of the rupee and to assure the greatest possible freedom of its use in the 
current international transactions.
 Accordingly, it is a responsibility of the Central Bank to maintain a suitable exchange rate 
arrangement for the country in line with the underlying macroeconomic conditions and maintain  
international stability of the currency. This paper outlines the way in which the Bank discharged 
this responsibility by maintaining an appropriate exchange system and effecting changes to the 
system promptly to deal with emerging challenges and thereby endeavoured to maintain the 
international stability of the currency over the last 60 years.   
Determining the Exchange Rate – 
Exchange Rate Regimes in Sri Lanka
Mrs. S. Gunaratne
Additional Director, Economic Research Department
69
The author wishes to express her sincere gratitude and thanks to Dr. D. S. Wijesinghe, former Deputy Governor of the 
Central Bank of Sri Lanka who provided necessary guidance and comments in preparation of this article.
7
PDFPAGE81
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
70
Fixed Exchange Rate Regime
At the time of independence, Sri Lanka had a fixed exchange rate system pegged to the pound  
sterling under the Bretton Woods System. The linking of the rupee with the pound ster ling was 
influenced mainly by Sri Lanka’s trade links with the Sterling Area, which had been established 
during the pre-independence colonial era. According to the Ceylon Currency Ordinance No .2 of 
1949, there had been an automatic link of the Sri Lankan rupee with pound sterling via Indian 
rupee. Hence, even though the Pound Sterling was devalued in 1949, according to th is law it 
was not possible to change the rupee exchange rate against the pound sterling as long as the 
sterling-Indian rupee exchange rate remained unchanged. The Currency Law was amended by 
the Currency Amendment Act No.4 of September 1949 to abandon this automatic sterling-Indian 
rupee link with the Sri Lankan rupee. Accordingly, the exchange rate of the Sri Lankan  rupee 
was linked directly to gold instead of the Indian rupee or the pound sterling. This amendment of 
the Law gave the flexibility to Sri Lanka to determine its own exchange rate in relation to any 
currency. The parity was fixed at one Sri Lankan rupee to 2.88 grams of gold, preserving the then 
existing parity of the Sri Lankan rupee with the pound sterling at 1 shilling and six p ence. Thus, 
the value of the pound sterling in terms of the rupee was Rs. 13.3336.
 The US dollar-rupee rate was determined by the US dollar-sterling rate in the London 
market. As mentioned above, even though the Sri Lankan rupee was not devalued when the 
pound sterling was devalued in 1949, the Sri Lankan rupee was devalued against the US do llar 
by 30 per cent to Rs. 4.77. The devaluation coupled with the Korean War boom, brought about a 
massive surplus in the balance of payments. When Sri Lanka accepted membership of the IMF in 
1950, this parity was used as the par value of the rupee. During the 1948-1966  period, the parity 
between the rupee and the pound sterling remained unchanged at Rs. 13.3336, while the rupee-
dollar exchange rate remained unchanged at Rs. 4.77 during 1949 – 1966.
 The continued pressure on external assets in Sri Lanka due to imports growing at a faster 
rate than exports, made it imperative that the Sri Lankan rupee be devalued. Accordingly, it w as 
devalued by 20 per cent on 22 November 1967. Though this was intended to imp rove export 
competitiveness in Sri Lanka while discouraging imports, it proved to be an unsuccessful attempt 
as it was effected with a considerable time lag in relation to the developments in external trade.
Multiple Exchange Rate Regime (1968-1977)
The fixed exchange rate system came under tremendous pressure towards late 1950s but was 
continued despite balance of payments problems and a rapid depletion of international reserves 
with the support of progressively stringent controls imposed on external trade and paymen ts. In 
1968, an attempt was made at partial liberalisation by introducing a system of Foreign Exchange 
Entitlement Certificates (FEECs). The FEECs was a system of dual exchange rates with one 
“official” exchange rate applicable to essential imports and traditional exports, and the other much 
PDFPAGE82
71
Determining the Exchange Rate – Exchange Rate Regimes in Sri Lanka
depreciated rate applicable to all other exports and imports. This had the twin objectives of export 
diversification with an additional incentive for non-traditional exports and import compression  
by allowing the market mechanism to regulate “non-essential” imports, and thereby addressing 
the balance of payments problem in the country. Initially, the FEECs rate for the poun d sterling 
was fixed at Rs. 20.5714, which was 44 per cent above the official rate of Rs. 14.2857  per pound 
sterling. This rate was increased to 55 per cent in 1969 and to 65 per cent in 197 2. However, the 
BOP deficit was continued, requiring further tightening of controls particularly with the oil price 
crisis in 1973. The FEECs system was continued with such stringent controls till 1977.
 The convertibility of the US dollar into gold was suspended in August 1971 by the United 
States. With this, the rupee was linked to the US dollar at the prevailing parity of Rs. 5.952 4 per 
US dollar, allowing the parities against other currencies to be determined on the basis of their 
cross rates to the US dollar in international foreign exchange markets. As the Bretton Woods fixed 
exchange rate system began to collapse globally, in June 1972, the pound sterling was floated.  
With this, the rupee, which had been linked to the US dollar from November 1971 was r e-linked 
to the pound sterling in July 1972 at the existing parity of Rs. 14.94. The p arities with other 
currencies were fixed from time to time on the basis of their cross rates with the pound sterling in  
the international foreign exchange markets. Though this practice of fixing the exchange r ate from 
time to time could have created arbitrage opportunities, it may have not been possible to make 
use of such opportunities due to exchange control regulations. 
 Sri Lanka moved from a hard peg to a single currency, to a basket peg in May 1 976 in 
determining the exchange rate by relating it to an appropriately weighted basket of currencies. 
This step was necessitated by the need to insulate the rupee from random events abroad, which 
under the previous regime, tended to be transmitted to Sri Lanka, via the link between the r upee 
and the pound sterling. With the use of a basket of currencies in the determination of the exchange 
rate, there was a greater scope for underlying trends in the Sri Lankan economy to be represented 
in Sri Lanka’s exchange rates vis-a-vis other currencies. The exchange rate was gradually r e-
adjusted under a crawling peg system between August and mid November 1977 with the intention 
of finding a more realistic rate of exchange for the rupee. 
Managed Floating Exchange Rate Regime (1977 – 2001)
In November 1977, Sri Lanka made a major shift from restrictive policies towards a liberal policy 
regime by removing most of the restrictions on transactions on external trade and payments. T he 
dual exchange rate system was abolished by introducing a unified exchange rate, while the rupee 
was initially depreciated by 46 per cent. With the unification, the exchange rate was allowed to 
float, providing scope for the exchange rate to be determined largely on the basis of demand and 
supply conditions in the market. The new system marked a radical shift in Sri Lanka’s exchange 
rate policy by moving from a fixed exchange rate regime to a managed floating exchange rate 
system based on a basket of currencies. The more market oriented system of managed float was 
PDFPAGE83
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
72
expected to insulate the domestic currency from unwarranted random events and to maintain a 
realistic exchange rate closer to the true price to ensure the external competitiveness of domestic 
goods and services. 
 Under the managed floating system, the Central Bank initially quoted its fixed daily 
buying and selling rates for six major currencies. However, after 1982, the Bank limited its 
quotations only to the intervention currency, the US dollar, allowing the commercial banks to 
determine the cross rates for other currencies based on market conditions. At the beginning, the 
band width was set at Rs. 1.50 per US dollars 100. This was revised to Rs. 3.00 per US dollars 
100 in March 1987. The margin was gradually raised to 1 per cent by March 19 92 and to 2 per 
cent in 1995.Therefore, this system was better known as a managed floating with a crawling band. 
With the liberalisation of the exchange rate under the managed float system, the country also 
liberalised its payments system by removing exchange control regulations. By March 1994, it 
had completed the removal of all restrictions on current external transactions and accepted Article 
VIII of the Articles of Agreements of the IMF. Capital account transactions were also largely 
liberalised, except for restrictions on investment abroad and borrowing abroad by residen ts, and 
investment in domestic debt instruments by non-residents.
In 2000, the Sri Lankan economy faced a major challenge of a critical decline in its external 
reserves due to two main reasons, i.e., a sharp increase in the prices of petroleum products and 
expenditure on defence related imports with the escalation of war with terrorists. Accordingly, 
a massive deficit of US dollars 516 million in the balance of payments was recorded in 2000, 
placing a tremendous pressure on the external reserves and the exchange rate. 
Chart 7.1
Buying and Selling Rates of the Central Bank and Market Rates
1
2
6
8
9
12
13
14
15
16
19
20
22
70	  
75	  
80	  
85	  
90	  
95	  
03-­‐Jan-­‐00	  
17-­‐Jan-­‐00	  
31-­‐Jan-­‐00	  
14-­‐Feb-­‐00	  
28-­‐Feb-­‐00	  
13-­‐Mar-­‐00	  
27-­‐Mar-­‐00	  
10-­‐Apr-­‐00	  
24-­‐Apr-­‐00	  
08-­‐May-­‐00	  
22-­‐May-­‐00	  
05-­‐Jun-­‐00	  
19-­‐Jun-­‐00	  
03-­‐Jul-­‐00	  
17-­‐Jul-­‐00	  
31-­‐Jul-­‐00	  
14-­‐Aug-­‐00	  
28-­‐Aug-­‐00	  
11-­‐Sep-­‐00	  
25-­‐Sep-­‐00	  
09-­‐Oct-­‐00	  
23-­‐Oct-­‐00	  
06-­‐Nov-­‐00	  
20-­‐Nov-­‐00	  
04-­‐Dec-­‐00	  
18-­‐Dec-­‐00	  
01-­‐Jan-­‐01	  
15-­‐Jan-­‐01	  
29-­‐Jan-­‐01	  
12-­‐Feb-­‐01	  
Rs.	  per	  US	  $	  
Chart	  7.1	  Buying	  and	  Selling	  Rates	  of	  the	  Central	  Bank	  and	  Market	  Rates	  
	  CBSL	  Buying	  Rate	  CBSL	  Selling	  Rate	   Market	  Rate	  
20	  Jun.	  2000	  
Band	  widened	  to	  5%	  
of	  middle	  rate	  and	  
Fixed.	  Middle	  rate	  
depreciated	  by	  4%.	  
03	  Nov.	  2000	  
Band	  widened	  to	  6%	  
of	  buying	  rate.	  
Crawling	  band.	  
11	  Dec.	  2000	  
Band	  widened	  to	  8%	  
of	  buying	  rate.	  
Crawling	  band.	  
12	  Jan.	  2001	  
Band	  widened	  to	  10%	  
of	  buying	  rate.	  
Crawling	  band.	  
23	  Jan.	  2001	  CBSL	  
stopped	  announcing	  
buying/selling	  rates.	  
PDFPAGE84
73
Determining the Exchange Rate – Exchange Rate Regimes in Sri Lanka
In this background, the Central Bank faced a major challenge in managing the exchange 
rate with the crawling band. There was a continued pressure on the exchange rate to depreciate 
and the market exchange rate tended to operate around the Central Bank’s selling rate most of  the 
time, requiring the Bank to sell foreign exchange to defend the exchange rate. The Central Bank 
responded to this by widening the spread between its buying rate and the selling rate. As shown 
in Table 7.1 & Chart 7.1, it was raised progressively to 5 per cent in June 2000, to 6 per cent in 
November, to 8 per cent in December and to 10 per cent in January 2001, allowing mar ket forces 
a greater scope to determine the exchange rate. 
However, the market exchange rate reached the selling rate of the Bank immediately after 
the widening of the band, and this proved the fact that maintaining an exchange rate band  was 
no longer sustainable given the market conditions prevailing at the time with rapidly dwindling 
external reserves. The country’s official external reserves fell sharply from US dollars 1,619  
million at end 1999 to US dollars 1,386 million by June 2000 and further to US dollar 1,043 
million by end December 2000. This level of reserves was not sufficient to finance even two 
months of imports. The Bank also lost the control over monetary policy as monetary policy  
had to be used to defend the exchange rate, rather than to achieve its primary objective of  price 
stability. The Bank raised its Repurchase and Reverse Repurchase rates eight times to reach 20 
per cent and 23 per cent, respectively, by January 2001, from 9.25 per cent and 13.48 per cent that 
prevailed in December 1999 (Table 7.2). These increases in interest rates and reserve losses were 
the cost of maintaining a fixed exchange rate band. This showed that this system of exchange 
rate determination was not sustainable over the long run and hence it was imperative that the 
country move to a system of free floating unless it was prepared to give up the achievements in 
liberalisation so far and move back to introducing restrictions on current account transaction s, 
violating the obligations under the Article VIII of the IMF.
Independent Floating Exchange Rate Regime 
Sri Lanka took a major step forward in the liberalisation of foreign exchange transactions o n 
23 January 2001, by allowing commercial banks to determine the exchange rate freely while 
abstaining from daily announcement of the buying and selling rates of foreign exchang e in 
advance. It indicated that the Bank would participate actively in buying and selling at or near 
market prices. The new system permitted freer transactions in the market while stabilising the 
value of the rupee and helping authorities to build up official foreign reserves. This in fact was a 
culmination of the process of allowing greater flexibility in the determination of the exchange rate 
by widening the band with its complete removal. In order to support the system by restrain ing 
speculative activities in the market, which were likely in the early stage of floating and to 
encourage exporters to bring back export proceeds, the Bank also implemented the following  
precautionary prudential measures.
• Limits were placed on daily working balances maintained by commercial banks in 
foreign exchange, on the basis of past export-import transactions. This was to prevent 
banks building up foreign exchange for excessive trading.
PDFPAGE85
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
74
• Banks were instructed to ensure settlement of export proceeds within 90 days. Penalty 
interest rates were to be charged when overdue. 
• Forward sales and purchase of foreign exchange were to be backed by a rupee depo sit of 
50 per cent, to discourage excessive forward contracting.
• Banks were advised not to permit early or prepayment of import bills, in anticipation of 
depreciation.
• Banks were also instructed to limit their forward market operations only to trade based 
transactions.
Date Band width Exchange Rate of CBSL (Rs./US$) Depreciation (%) at CBSL
Buying Middle Selling Buying Middle Selling
10-Nov-1982 Rs.1.50/= per 100 US$ 21.0225 21.03 21.0375 - -
6-Mar-1987 Rs.1.50/= per 100 US$ 28.7325 28.74 28.7475
9-Mar-1987 Rs.3/= per 100 US$ 28.735 28.75 28.765 0.01 0.03 0.06
28-Feb-1992 Rs.3/= per 100 US$ 42.9650 42.9800 42.9950
23-Mar-1992 1.0 per cent 42.9840 43.2000 43.4160 0.04 0.51 0.97
17-Mar-1995 1.0 per cent 49.6804 49.9300 50.1797
20-Mar-1995 2.0 per cent 49.4109 49.9100 50.4091 -0.55 -0.04 0.46
19-Jun-2000 2.0 per cent 73.6907 74.4350 75.1794
20-Jun-2000 5.0 per cent 75.6000 77.5400 79.4700 2.53 4.00 5.40
2-Nov-2000 5.0 per cent 75.6000 77.5400 79.4700
3-Nov-2000 6.0 per cent 75.6000 77.8700 80.1400 0.00 0.42 0.84
8-Dec-2000 6.0 per cent 76.8700 79.1400 81.4100
11-Dec-2000 8.0 per cent 76.8700 79.9448 83.0196 0.00 1.01 1.94
11-Jan-2001 8.0 per cent 77.2750 80.3498 83.4246
12-Jan-2001 10.0 per cent 77.2750 81.1388 85.0025 0.00 0.97 1.86
22-Jan-2001 10.0 per cent 77.4050 81.2688 85.1325
22-Jan-2001 CBSL stopped announcing its buying and selling rat es in advance.
Table 7.1
Exchange Rate Changes
Note: During 10 November 1982 to 2 November 2000, the band was computed symmetrically about the middle rate.   
     Since 3 November 2000, it is computed from the buying rate.
PDFPAGE86
75
Determining the Exchange Rate – Exchange Rate Regimes in Sri Lanka
Immediately with the change in the exchange rate regime, an overshooting of the rate was 
expected and did occur, as experienced in a number of other countries. The rupee d epreciated 
from Rs. 85 to around Rs. 98 per US dollar within the first three days, but stabilised ar ound Rs. 
88-90 per US dollar within a week’s time. The weighted average exchange rate in the spot market 
recorded a depreciation of 9.1 per cent by 25 January 2001 compared with the p re-float level, 
but the rate of depreciation declined to 1 per cent by 7 March 2001. This was a relativ ely quick 
stabilisation of the exchange rate compared with the experience of other countries that floated 
their exchange rates. For example, Brazil’s currency depreciated by 21 per cent on the first month 
of floating in January 1999, while the Indian rupee depreciated by 16 per cent in the first month 
of floating in March 1993.
Under the independent floating exchange rate system, it is not necessary for the Bank to 
use monetary policy to defend the exchange rate, as the exchange rate is not considered a nominal 
anchor. Therefore, the Bank is able to target its monetary policy to achieve the prime objective 
of price stability. However, the Central Bank can intervene in the market to prevent excessive 
fluctuations in the exchange rate. The Market Operations Committee (MOC) of the Central Bank 
daily monitors the current and expected foreign exchange inflows and outflows, movements in the 
dollar in the international market against SDR basket of currencies (Euro, Yen, UK Pound, U S 
Date Repo Rate Reverse Repo Rate Bank Rate
31-Dec-99  9.25 13.48 16.00
05-Jan-00  9.00 
21-Jan-00 13.30
04-Apr-00 13.00
09-May-00  9.25 
12-May-00 13.25
19-May-00 14.00
08-Jun-00  9.50 
26-Jul-00  11.00 
31-Aug-00  11.75 
19-Sep-00 15.50
29-Sep-00  13.00 16.00
02-Oct-00 18.00
08-Nov-00  15.00 18.00 20.00
21-Nov-00  17.00 20.00 25.00
18-Jan-01  20.00 23.00
   
Table 7.2
Changes in Central Bank Interest Rates
Source: Central Bank of Sri Lanka
PDFPAGE87
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
76
dollar) and against the real effective exchange rate (REER) computed with a 5-currency basket 
(euro, yen, pound sterling, US dollar, Indian rupee), indicators such as interest r ate differential 
and forward premium and net open position of the commercial banks etc. in order to identify any 
risk of large fluctuations in the exchange rate to examine whether there is a need for the Central 
Bank to intervene. One of the large items of foreign exchange outflows in Sri Lanka h as been the 
settlement of oil bills by the Ceylon Petroleum Corporation (CPC), which destabilises the market 
when they attempt to purchase a large amount of foreign exchange from the market to settle oil 
bills. Therefore, the Central Bank allowed CPC to open and maintain foreign currency accoun ts 
with two state commercial banks to build up foreign exchange deposits gradually enabling them 
to settle oil bills.  
Under the present system of independent floating where the exchange rate is determined 
through market forces, the Central Bank intervention in the foreign exchange market by 
purchasing or selling foreign exchange has been limited only to contain excessive volatility in 
the exchange rate, and to build up reserves. Table 7.3 shows movements of the rupee ag ainst 
the US dollar and the intervention by the Central Bank since the commencement of the new 
exchange rate regime. Except for a few exceptions, the general tendency in the exchange rate 
has been to depreciate though at a varying degree, which reflect largely the higher inflation in  Sri 
Lanka relative to inflation in its trade partner countries. In 2005, the rupee appreciated with the 
expectation of large scale foreign exchange inflows to assist people and re-build areas affected 
by the Tsunami. In November 2006, the government Treasury bill market was opened f or foreign 
investors up to a maximum of 5 per cent of the outstanding stock. This ceiling was raised to  10 
per cent in December 2007. The government Treasury bond market too was opened up  to 10 per 
cent of outstanding stock for foreign investment in May 2008. Since interest rates in Sri Lanka 
were quite high relative to international markets, there had been considerable foreign financial 
inflows to the government securities market, particularly since late 2007, exerting pressure on the 
rupee to appreciate. The Central Bank as a prudential measure built up its reserves by absorbing  
most of the inflows and thereby contained the rupee appreciation.
Sri Lanka faced a major challenge of a significant decline in its foreign exchange reserves 
from the last quarter of 2008 till about mid 2009 with pressure on the exchange rate to depreciate. 
This was mainly due to the adverse impact of the global financial crisis together with the 
intensification of the war. There was a heavy demand for foreign exchange during the fir st few 
months of 2009, due to repatriation of investments in government securities by foreig n investors, 
in view of their own liquidity constraints due to financial crisis, the settlement of large petroleum 
and war related import bills, and acute drying up of sources of foreign financing. As there was a 
severe shortage of foreign exchange in the market, the Central Bank had to fill it by supp lying a 
significant amount of US dollars out of its foreign exchange reserves, as otherwise there would 
have been a substantial depreciation of the rupee, which could have been rather destabilising 
and would have had a lasting impact on the confidence of foreign investors, making their return 
to the country even with the restoration of normalcy in the international financial market rather 
PDFPAGE88
77
Determining the Exchange Rate – Exchange Rate Regimes in Sri Lanka
unlikely. Accordingly, gross official reserves reached a low level of US dollars 1,082 million by 
March 2009. The rupee depreciated to its lowest level of Rs. 120.25 against the US dollar by 
April 2009.
However, with the ending of the war in May 2009, and the approval of the Stand- by 
Arrangement Facility (SBA) by the IMF in July 2009, investor confidence improved and fo reign 
investments in government securities increased substantially. The Central Bank commenced re-
building its reserves by absorbing foreign exchange from the market and thereby con taining the 
Table 7.3
Movements of the Exchange Rate and the Intervention by the Central Bank
Year Exchange rate 
Rs/$ (End period)
Appr./Depr.
%
Purchases
US$ mn
Sales
US$ mn
Net
US$ mn
2001 93.16 -14.06 180.25 45.68 134.58
2002 96.73 -3.69 223.65 46.58 177.08
2003 96.74 -0.01 377.40 2.50 374.90
2004 104.61 -7.52 27.0 541.68 -514.68
2005 102.12 2.44 289.95 463.70 -173.75
2006 107.71 -5.19 306.95 790.98 -484.03
2007 108.72 -0.93 592.63 715.85 -123.23
2008 113.14 -3.91 656.10 1,531.86 -875.76
2009 114.38 -1.08 3122.00 830.09 2,291.92
2010 110.95 3.09 753.20 819.80 -66.60
Source: Central Bank of Sri Lanka
Note: Negative sign denotes depreciation.
pressure on the rupee to appreciate. The receipt of two tranches of IMF facility amounting to 
US dollars 652 million, and a sovereign bond issue of US dollars 500 million in 2009  further 
supported to raise foreign reserves. Accordingly, the country’s official reserves increased to  US 
dollars 5 billion by end 2009. Other foreign inflows, such as private remittances, tourist earnings 
and trade related inflows also increased since the end of war. With this, foreign exchange supp ly 
in the market improved and accordingly the rupee appreciated during the second half of  the year. 
It reached Rs. 114.38 per dollar by end of the year, resulting only a marginal depreciation of 1.08 
per cent for the whole year. However, when compared to Rs. 120.25 per US dollar b y April 2009, 
the exchange rate recorded an appreciation of 5.1 per cent by end of the year.
The inflow of foreign exchange continued into 2010, recording a further appreciation of the 
rupee by about 3.1 per cent from end December 2009 to December 2010 to reach Rs.  110.95 per 
dollar. Accordingly there has been a turnaround in the tendency in the rupee from depreciation 
PDFPAGE89
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
78
Chart 7.2
Central Bank Intervention and Rs/USD Exchange Rate
0
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
3,000
3,500
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
USD mn
Rs. per USD
85
90
95
100
105
110
115
120
Purchase (LHS)
Sales (LHS)
Exchange rate Rs/$  (End Period) (RHS)
to appreciation, posing challenges in managing with continued foreign financial inflows. There 
is a pressing need to prevent a large appreciation of the rupee to support exporters to  maintain 
competitiveness of their products in the international market. However, continued net purchases of 
foreign exchange by the Central Bank, though it augmented official foreign reserves and  avoided 
large appreciation of the rupee, it has led to a substantial increase in excess rupee liquidity in the 
market making the monetary management a difficult task. The Bank has run out of its holdings 
of Treasury bills and commenced issuing its own securities in absorbing excess liquidity. A new 
instrument of dollar-rupee SWAP was also introduced for the same. Yet the excess liquidity 
remains quite high, which will eventually pose a risk of high monetary expansion unless measures 
were taken to address it. The sterilisation cost in 2010 was Rs. 12 billion. Therefore, in o rder to 
avoid any further build up of domestic rupee liquidity, a further liberalisation in cap ital account 
transactions with a careful monitoring system could be considered to ensure overall macro-
economic stability of the country. In fact, initiatives in this regard have already been made.
PDFPAGE90
79
Background 
The payment system, which consists of instruments for effecting payments and settlements of 
transactions, together with necessary infrastructure and legal and regulatory framework for the 
same is the backbone of a country’s monetary and financial system. A sound, efficient and reliable 
payment system is a sine qua non for financial system stability without which the central bank 
of a country could not conduct its monetary policy to achieve its objective of price stability.  
The Central Bank of Sri Lanka (CBSL) has well recognised the importance of the payment and 
settlement system and has taken initiatives and leadership in developing and modernising it to be 
in line with the international best practices and standards. 
At the time of establishing the Central Bank, the widely used mode of payment was ‘cash’ 
comprising currency notes and coins. Over the last 60 years, the relative importance of cash as a 
mode of payment has declined with the development of the financial system and the introduction 
of innovative instruments for effecting payments and settling transactions. This is indicated by the 
decline in currency notes and coins in circulation in the broadly defined money supply f rom 33 
per cent in 1950 to 12 per cent by 2009, a result of gradual movement towards non-cash payment 
modes such as cheques, credit and debit cards, and internet and other electronic payments. Th e 
introduction of such non-cash payment systems however required the development of necessary  
infrastructure including an efficient interbank payment and settlement system.
Payments and Settlements – 
Evolution of Sri Lanka’s Payment System
Mrs. J.P. Mampitiya
Assistant Governor
8
PDFPAGE91
80
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
‘Cheque’ as an Instrument of Payment and Evolution of 
the Clearing Process   
Cheques drawn against deposits maintained at banks gained popularity as a non cash payment 
instrument with the development of banking systems of the country, though there are records of 
use of cheques even as far back as 1820. However, the first mentioning of a clearing pr ocess, 
an essential requirement for effecting payments by cheques in Sri Lanka has been in 1885 by 
the Colombo branches of the Madras Bank and the Imperial Bank of India. Over the last 6 0 
years, cheques have gained their importance as a mode of payment as indicated by the increase in 
the size of daily clearing. For example, the value of cheques cleared through the clearing ho use 
which stood at around Rs. 31.5 million per day in 1951 has increased to Rs. 370 million per day 
by 1980 and to around Rs. 21.8 billion per day at end June 2010.
Manual Clearing
As per Section 98(1) of the Monetary Law Act, the Central Bank is required to provide clearing 
facilities for transactions among commercial banks operating in Sri Lanka. On 29 August 1950,  
after the establishment of the Central Bank, the Bank took over the clearing functions from the 
Colombo branch of the Imperial Bank of India, which until then functioned as the clearin g bank. 
The clearing mechanism adopted at that time required all banks to meet at the Central Bank to 
physically exchange the cheques received from other banks. The banks met at the Central Bank in 
the morning for the main clearing (to exchange the cheques presented to one bank by a customer 
for collection of funds from another bank) and for the settlement clearing (to return the invalid 
cheques back to the presenting bank) at noon each day and computed manually the net clearing 
balances. The Central Bank settled the net clearing balances by manually passing entries in the 
accounts of banks held in its books and informed the net account balances to banks by 8.00 a.m. 
the next business day. This process of clearing created many errors as well as delays as balancing 
and accounting functions were handled manually. 
Establishment of the Sri Lanka Automated Clearing House 
With the increasing volumes of cheques for daily clearance, it became imperative that the clearing 
process be automated. Accordingly, the Sri Lanka Automated Cheque Clearing House (SLACH) 
was established on 02 March 1988 as a sub-division of the then Data Processing Department of 
the Bank. The automation required to modify the cheque leaf to include a Magnetic Ink Ch aracter 
Recognition (MICR) band to encode in machine readable form all required information for 
clearing such as paying bank, cheque number, value, etc. The cheques were sorted electronically  
according to the recipient bank order through reader/sorter machines. This process con siderably 
reduced the number of days required for realisation of a cheque. However, as the ph ysical cheque 
still had to travel from the collecting bank to the SLACH, it was not possible to have a uniform  
realisation time island-wide. In order to reduce the travel time of the cheque, the CBSL introduced 
PDFPAGE92
81
Payments and Settlements – Evolution of Sri Lanka Payment System
regional clearings at its 3 regional offices located at Matara, Anuradhapura and Matale which 
eliminated the need for cheques collected in these regions to come to Colombo for the central 
clearing. In addition, some banks had informal regional clearing arrangements to clear cheques 
collected in certain areas.  
Sri Lanka Interbank Payment System (SLIPS) 
The establishment of the SLACH was followed by, and facilitated the introduction of an electronic 
funds transfer (EFT) system for inter-bank transactions named as the Sri Lanka Interbank  
Payment System (SLIPS) in August 1993. This enabled the movement of funds from one acco unt 
to another or to a number of accounts without a piece of paper such as a cheque, pay order or 
voucher to authorise or prove the transfer, electronically by forwarding the details with adequate 
data security controls, in a computer diskette. Initially, this system was mainly used for credit 
payments only, but was extended to accommodate debit payments in February 1995. 
The SLIP System reduced the use of cheques and is currently extensively used for small 
value bulk transactions such as the payment of salaries, utility bills, EPF benefits, etc. Transactions 
cleared through SLIPS per day has grown to an average of over 40,000 transactio ns valued at 
Rs. 1.4 billion in 2010 with a peak level of 380,000 transactions a day during the year. With the 
implementation of an enhancement to the system on 21 September 2010, transactions can now be 
cleared on T+0 basis (the payment will be credited to the recipients’ account on the same day). 
It has also enabled the introduction of multiple settlements a day further reducing the settlement 
risk. 
Establishment of LankaClear (Pvt) Ltd. 
The Central Bank observed that a number of countries had already implemented independent 
clearing houses which were found to be more efficient and cost effective. Accordingly, the cheque 
clearing function was divested to a new company, LankaClear (Pvt) Ltd. (LCPL) incorpor ated 
under the Companies Act on 08 February 2002. The participants in the clearing process; th e 
commercial banks and the CBSL became shareholders of the company. The CBSL also decided 
to be the major individual shareholder by obtaining 19.6 per cent of the issued shar es. Since 
its establishment, LCPL has been operated successfully without any major interruptions and 
recorded profit continuously. In parallel to this development, a US dollar clearing system was also 
introduced on 01 October 2002 by LCPL to reduce dollar cheque clearing time.
Implementation of Cheque Imaging and Truncation System 
In 2005, Central Bank together with LCPL commenced planning to implement a Cheque Imaging 
and Truncation System (CITS) to further reduce the cheques realisation time which was in the 
range of 1 to 10 days depending on the geographical location of the receiving an d paying banks. 
PDFPAGE93
82
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
With this system, the physical cheque is truncated at the collecting bank/branch and only the 
image will travel to LCPL for sorting. To facilitate this process, LCPL established 10 regional 
centres island-wide for the bank/branches to hand over the cheques for image capturing until such 
time the branches developed their own capacities. The cheque had to be further standardised in 
order to capture legible images as verification of signatures will be done through the image and  
not through the physical cheque with the implementation of the system. The 10 regional centres 
transferred the images through dedicated communication lines to LCPL where the images were 
sorted and directed to the paying bank. The main advantage of embarking on the CI TS was to 
clear cheques island-wide without any geographical boundaries, on T+1 (where T is the day of 
deposit of the cheque and 1 is the following business day). The CITS System was successfully 
implemented on the 11 May 2006.  
Since the implementation of CITS, all commercial banks have upgraded their technology 
and almost all bank/branches are now linked to their head office systems through core-banking  
packages. This has reduced significantly the need to continue with the LCPL’s regional offices for 
collection and imaging of cheques. Accordingly, the regional offices were closed with effect from 
01 July 2010 and currently, all banks submit the images to LCPL directly. 
Introduction of Payment Cards 
Payment card is a paym ent method that has revolutionised the way the consumers and service 
providers transact. The cards may come in the form of special purpose cards, credit cards o r debit 
cards. Although local credit cards have been in existence since early 1980s, the first international 
credit card related products were introduced by Sampath Bank and Bank of Ceylon in 19 89. The 
first debit card ‘Maestro Debit’ issued by the Sampath Bank in 1997 was the first in South Asia 
which provided access to international ATMs and transactions at merchant level. Subsequently, 
the VISA Electron Debit card was issued by Bank of Ceylon. Currently, there are over 2 4,000 
Point of Sale (POS) machines installed at merchant outlets to be used for card payments. To 
minimise frauds when using the cards for payment purposes, the CHIP enabled cards were 
introduced in Sri Lanka in 2008 by some banks. The growth of use of credit cards have been slow 
due to high interest charges that are levied for late payments and other charges such as joining 
and annual fees levied for different types of cards. Currently there are over 830, 000 credit cards 
issued to customers by banks and the average number of transactions using credit cards is around 
1.4 million valued at over Rs. 5.0 billion a month. Similarly, there are over 6.0 million debit cards 
(including ATM cards) that are used for local as well as international transactions. 
In 2009, the payment card industry was brought under the regulation of the CBSL  by the 
Service providers of Payment Cards Regulation, No. 1 of 2009 which became effective from 31 
July 2009. The Regulation requires all Service Providers of payment cards to register with th e 
PDFPAGE94
83
Payments and Settlements – Evolution of Sri Lanka Payment System
CBSL. Currently, 17 financial institutions have registered with the CBSL under the Regulation. 
Further, the CBSL shall be responsible for regulating and monitoring all service providers of 
payment cards registered under the Regulation. In addition, to ensure safe, secure and ef ficient 
use and operation of credit cards, the Credit Card operational guidelines were issued to all credit 
card issuers on 01 March 2010.
Phone/Mobile/Tele-banking/Internet Banking
Electronic payment methods using devices such as phone, mobile or Internet are increasing in 
popularity with the adoption of modern technology by the general customer. These metho ds of 
payments have been in operation for the past 4 – 5 years but have recorded a significant growth in 
recent times. The Central Bank, as the regulator, preparing for the growth in electronic pay ments, 
is in the process of issuing guidelines on mobile payments and internet banking which are 
expected to be released early 2011. 
Implementation of the Real Time Gross Settlement System 
Cash payments have finality in settlement and are generally accepted as a medium of exchange. 
However, non-cash payment systems where the transaction is between two banks impose a 
settlement risk for the Central Bank as the settlement of each bank’s obligation towards another 
are made on a net-basis at the end of the day. Each bank maintains an account with the CBSL 
and such obligations are settled through the funds available in these accounts. However, as th e 
settlement happened at the end of the day, the CBSL was faced with the risk of not being able 
to settle the balances even if one bank was short of funds. Accordingly, there is a risk that the 
manual end of day settlement of banks’ liabilities would lead to instability of the entire financial 
system. Considering this risk as well as to maintain the system more efficiently, the CBSL 
introduced a Real Time Gross Settlement System (RTGS) on 08 September 2003 to facilitate 
settlement of high value and time critical transactions on a real time basis. This implementation 
enabled the country’s banking system to effect interbank payments and complete settlements 
among themselves on a real time basis, settling through the accounts maintained at the CBSL, 
eliminating undue settlement risk that was prevalent with manual end of day settlement system 
which exposed the CBSL to credit, liquidity and insolvency risks of the commercial banks. Sri 
Lanka was the first country in South Asia to introduce an RTGS System. 
RTGS system is considered as a systemically important payment system which  
requires adherence to international standard such as the 10 core principles put forward by   
the Bank for International Settlement (BIS) for operation of such systems. Currently the  
RTGS is operated with over 99.6 per cent system availability and in full compliance with the BIS 
standards. 
PDFPAGE95
84
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
With the enactment of the Payment and Settlement Systems Act in 2005, the Central Bank 
was empowered to be the authority responsible for the national payment system. Implementation 
of the RTGS for high value payments has brought about financial discipline among all users as 
adequate reserves have to be maintained in the respective bank accounts for real time settlement. 
The Central Bank provides intraday liquidity (ILF) at no cost to the participants to bridg e the 
shortage of funds during the day provided that the banks returned the dues before the close of 
the system. The RTGS transactions are made through SWIFT (Society for Worldwide Interbank 
Financial Telecommunication) which ensures high security of transactions while on transmission. 
Currently 96.2 per cent of the value of all electronic transactions (excluding cheques) are routed 
through RTGS ensuring minimum settlement risk. The rest of the transactions are made using 
Internet and phone banking, SLIPS and other card based systems.  
Implementation of the Scripless Securities Settlement 
System 
With an objective of further developing the government securities market, the Scripless 
Securities Settlement System (SSSS) together with the Central Depositary System (CDS) named 
‘LankaSecure’ was implemented on 02 February 2004. It provided for the dematerialisation of 
government Treasury bills and bonds that were in scrip form to scripless or electronic form, 
new issues in scripless form and maintaining securities accounts of customers and movement 
of securities among all accounts. The LankaSecure is linked to RTGS to form LankaSettle, an 
integrated system for real time settlement of transactions including securities transactions. 
Under this system, all settlements relating to securities trading take place on DvP (Delivery Vs 
Payment) basis, completely eliminating the risk of delivery of securities without receiving the 
payment relating to the trade. The CDS records movements of securities or changes of their 
legal ownership on a real time basis. LankaSecure has greatly reduced the cost, manpower needs 
involved in issuance of government securities and provided enhanced security to investors. This 
implementation has completely eliminated the hassle of physically moving the scrip securities 
from one to another and expanded the securities trading in the secondary market as the system  
provides for the transfer of securities among customer accounts instantly and settlement arising 
from the trading on DvP basis on real time. 
Legal & Regulatory Framework
The Payment and Settlement Systems Act No.28 of 2005 (PSSA) provides among other things, a 
comprehensive legislation to govern payment, clearing and settlement systems and provides the 
CBSL with oversight and regulatory powers over payment and settlement systems. The Act also 
provides for electronic presentment of cheques and authority for the CBSL to maintain securities 
accounts for participants as well as customers which were required for the implementation of the 
CIT and SSS systems respectively. 
PDFPAGE96
85
Payments and Settlements – Evolution of Sri Lanka Payment System
The National Payments Council (NPC), the highest decision making body with regard to 
payment systems comprising of representatives from all stakeholders in the payments area was set 
up in 2007. The NPC is chaired by a Deputy Governor of the CBSL and represented by members 
from state, local private and foreign banks, LCPL, Stock Exchange and Ministry of Fin ance. 
Considering the responsibilities of developing the payment and settlement infrastructure, NPC in 
collaboration with all stakeholders, have prepared a road map defining milestones to be achieved 
in the country’s payment systems with target dates for completion.
As the regulator of PSS, the CBSL ensures that all participating institutions of 
systemically important payment systems have established proper business continuity plans and  
disaster recovery sites to ensure continuity of operations. Furthermore, the CBSL has  
commenced on-site as well as off-site surveillance of all payment system related activities of the 
stakeholders. 
Establishment of Financial Sector Certificate Authority 
With the popularisation of card based payments, internet based payments and other means of 
electronic payments, the need to establish proper information security for such transactions 
became evident. The ‘LankaSign’, the Certificate Authority for the financial sector was 
established on 22 May 2009 by LCPL which became the first Certificate Service Provider 
under the Electronic Transactions Act No. 19 of 2006. The use of Digital Certificates issued 
by LankaSign by financial institutions would ensure greater authenticity, integrity and reliability 
to electronic payment transactions. The Digital Certificates issued by LankaSign are currently 
used in the SLIPS enhancement for transmitting the SLIPS files securely to LCPL by the 
participating banks.
Cross Border Transactions
Payment systems relating to cross border transactions are very limited in Sri Lanka. However, 
the Asian Clearing Union (ACU) of which Sri Lanka is a founder member was established in 
1974 with the objective of facilitating international transactions on a multilateral basis among 
member countries to promote monetary cooperation among them and thereby to promote 
trade and economic activities among member countries. The other members of the ACU are 
Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Iran, Maldives, Myanmar, Nepal and Pakistan. The ACU Secretariat 
is located in Tehran, Iran. Under this payment mechanism, payments relating to trade among 
member countries made through Letters of Credit are routed through the respective central banks/
monetary authorities. The transacting currencies of the system are the US dollar and the Euro. 
The transactions among members are settled by the respective central banks on a net basis at 
the end of the two month period. Another advantage of this mechanism is the availability of a 
swap facility which provides temporary credit to any member country in distress to settle the net 
PDFPAGE97
86
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
positions. Significant changes are required to the ACU clearing mechanism to meet modern day 
requirements as the current semi- manual system is time consuming and involves a lot of paper 
work.   
SWIFT, the Society for Worldwide Inter-bank Financial Telecommunication is used for 
exchange of cross border payments between banks and other financial institutions. However, 
SWIFT is not considered as a payment system as it does not perform any form of clearing or  
settlement. SWIFT provides a secure way of transmitting messages from one place to another 
electronically. Although the RTGS is restricted to local payments, the transport mechanism used 
in RTGS is SWIFT to ensure security of high value payments.  
In addition to the financial institutions, financial services and communications companies 
such as Western Union and Money Gram are actively involved in person-to-person money 
transfers in Sri Lanka. These companies have large agent networks globally, which facilitate 
money transfers from any part of the world. In Sri Lanka, the services of both these providers are 
used to receive inward remittances. 
Regional Cooperation and Knowledge Sharing
The CBSL assumed leadership in establishing the SAARC Payments Council in 2008 with 
a view to strengthen the payment systems of the region by guiding the member countries to 
modernise their payment systems and to bring their payment systems to standards compatible 
with international standards and best practices. The SAARC Payments Council (SPC) is currently 
chaired by a Deputy Governor of the CBSL and the secretariat is located at the CBSL. The SPC 
meets every 6 months in a member country on a rotational basis. 
The CBSL, since the implementation of the RTGS prepares a ‘Payments Bulletin’, which 
is issued on a quarterly basis. This provides a comprehensive coverage of all payment systems/
mechanisms available in the country for domestic as well as international payments, and related 
statistics. The bulletin could be accessed through the Central Bank’s website ‘www.cbsl.gov.lk.’
Future Trends
It is envisaged that there will be a tremendous demand for further modernisation of payment 
systems in the near fu ture. The CBSL identifying the need to cater to the new payment  
instruments and payment channels that would evolve have already initiated the establishment 
of legal and regulatory systems for anticipated growth areas. Furthermore, to accommodate 
the growth in retail payments, LCPL with the CBSL have already initiated to set up a common 
ATM switch and a card switch in 2011 which will be expanded as a common payment switch. 
PDFPAGE98
87
Payments and Settlements – Evolution of Sri Lanka Payment System
The common ATM switch will provide convenience and accessibility for facilities such as cash 
withdrawals and balance inquiry from any ATM irrespective of the bank, at an afford able price. 
This will also provide benefits for customers of banks that do not have their own ATMs to use 
ATM facilities of other banks at a nominal cost. Furthermore, in preparation for fast track  growth 
trends, the CBSL has already initiated to upgrade the RTGS system to accommodate high volumes 
of transactions. 
References
Central Bank of Sri Lanka. Annual Report, Various Issues.
---. Payments Bulletin, Various Issues.
Jayamaha, Ranee. “The Significance of Payment Reforms in Financial System Stability.” Payment Systems and Cheque 
Imaging. Colombo, 2006.
Karunathilake, H.N.S. Fifty Years of Central Banking in Sri Lanka 1950-2000. Colombo: Centre for Demographic and 
Socio Economic Studies, 2000.
Wijewardena, W.A. “Real Time Gross Settlement and Scripless Government Securities.”
2nd Proof 2011 08 24
PDFPAGE99
88
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
PDFPAGE100
89
Currency notes and coins issued and in circulation form an integral component of money in 
the modern economy. It is a widely used instrument in the payment system, which is a part of 
the financial system of a country. Therefore, it is necessary to ensure that there is uninterrup ted 
availability of currency in the required quality and that it preserves its integrity and public 
confidence. This will contribute to the smooth functioning of the payments and settlement system 
and thereby add to the stability of the financial system. Hence, the  functions of issuing curr ency 
and management of currency in Sri Lanka is entrusted to the same authority which is responsible 
for maintaining economic and price stability and financial system stability.
Authority granted to the Central Bank 
The Central Bank of Sri Lanka (CBSL) was empowered by the Monetary Law Act No. 58 of 1949 
(MLA)1 with the sole right and authority to issue currency and for the management of currency. 
Currency issued by the CBSL is the sole legal tender for the payment of any amount in Sri Lanka, 
(i.e. the currency that can be officially used in the country). Currency facilitates payments fo r 
goods and services and settlement of debt, while it also acts as a store of value. 
Currency issued by the Central Bank of 
Sri Lanka
Ms. S.H. Gunawardena
Additional Superintendent, Currency Department
1 MLA Chapter III, Part I A, Sections 48 to 58.
9
PDFPAGE101
90
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
When the CBSL commenced operations in August 1950, it was authorised to issue 
any currency notes or “Ceylon” coins printed or minted under the authority of the Board of 
Commissioners of Currency (BCC) of the British colonial regime and remaining un-issued on 2 8 
August 1950. Further, the MLA provided for all currency notes and Ceylon co ins issued under 
the provisions of the Currency Ordinance No. 21 of 1941, and in circulation, to become liabilities 
of the CBSL. 2 Therefore, the CBSL in 1950 inherited a well-organised currency system from the 
British, which had evolved over a period of nearly 150 years.3 It was in this period that the decimal 
coinage had also been introduced, on 17 March 1872, where the decimal unit was expressed  at 
100 cents (Ceylon copper coins) to a rupee.4  Further, during this period, comparatively high value 
currency notes in the denominations of Rs. 500 and Rs. 1000 had been issued into  circulation 
but had been demonetised in early 1946 to prevent hoarding, black-market activities and in come 
tax evasion.5 The highest denomination to be issued had been in the denomination of Rs. 10,000 
for inter-bank transactions and for transactions between banks and the Currency Board.  The date 
on the note was 15 October 1947 with the signatures in facsimile of C.E.Jones and T.D.Perer a, 
Commissioners of Currency. 
According to the MLA, all characteristics of currency such as denominations, dimensions, 
designs, inscriptions on currency notes and the metals, fineness, weight, size, design, 
denominations in relation to coins issued by the CBSL have to be prescribed by the Monetary  
Board of the CBSL and approved by the Minister in charge of the subject of Finance. Further, 
every currency note should bear the signatures in facsimile of the Minister in charge of the subject 
of Finance and of the Governor of the CBSL. On the face of a currency note a legen d should state 
that the note is being issued on behalf of the Government of Sri Lanka indicating its legal ten der 
status. 
2 MLA Section 129 (2)
3 De Silva, G.P.S.H. History of Coins and Currency in Sri Lanka, the Centra l Bank of Sri Lanka, August 2000.
4 Salley, T.M.U. Sri Lanka Currency of Recent Times 1938-1985, the Central Bank of Sri Lanka 1986
5 MLA Chapter III, Part I A, Section 48 to 58

PDFPAGE102
91
Currency issued by the Central Bank of Sri Lanka
As it is with other countries, currency, both notes and coins (including commemorative 
notes and coins) issued by the CBSL reflect the historical and cultural heritage of Sri Lanka as 
well as the economic, political and social changes and developments that have taken place over 
the years in the country.  
Currency Notes issued by the CBSL
Until the CBSL commenced printing its own currency, it issued the currency stock it had inherited 
from the BCC, and printed by the India Government Security Press. It is also mentioned that, 
a supplementary order at least for the smaller denominations was placed in 1950 by the BCC 
to meet the CBSL requirements, until the CBSL was in a position to issue its own notes into 
circulation. Although the CBSL was able to print and issue into circulation its first currency notes 
in 1952, it was only by mid July 1955 that the CBSL had the desired denominations of  its own 
currency in circulation, replacing the notes issued by the BCC, with the exception of Rs. 100  and 
Rs. 50. Therefore, nearly 5 years after its establishment, the CBSL was in a position to recall by  
Gazette Notification dated 26 August 1955, all old-pattern currency notes of the denominations 
of Rs.10 and below, including the subsidiary notes of the denominations of cents 50 , cents 25 
and cents 10 bearing a date prior to 31 December 1950 with the signatures of the Commission ers 
of Currency. This is recorded as the first demonetisation exercise the CBSL carried out since its 
establishment.6 
Table 9.1
Currency Notes issued by the Central Bank of Sri Lanka up to 2011
Series Theme Denominations (Rs.) Year
  01 King George VI series 1, 10 1951
  02 Queen Elizabeth II series 1, 2, 5, 10, 50, 100 1952
  03 Armorial Ensign of Ceylon series 1, 2, 5, 10, 50, 100 1956
  04 S W R D Bandaranaike Portrait series 2, 5, 10, 50, 100 1962
  05 King Parakramabahu Series 2, 5, 10, 50, 100  1965
  06 Armorial Ensign of Sri Lanka series 50, 100  1975
  07 Fauna and Flora Series 2, 5, 10, 20, 50, 100  1979
  08 Historical and Archaeological series 5, 10, 20, 50, 100, 500, 100 0  1981
  09 Historical and Development series 500, 1000  1987
  10 Sri Lanka Heritage series 10, 20, 50, 100, 500, 1000 1991
2000 2005
  11 Development, Prosperity and Sri Lanka Dancers 20, 50, 100, 500, 10 00, 5000 2010
6 Salley, T.M.U.
PDFPAGE103
92
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
Since its establishment, the CBSL has issued eleven series of currency notes in different 
years up to 2011. Generally, when a new series of currency notes is issued by the CBSL, the notes 
of previous series continue to be legal tender and circulate alongside the new notes. The exception 
to this status quo was the event of the second demonetisation exercise of 1970. 
Table 9.1 gives the theme of the note series, denominations issued and the year of first 
issue as printed on the notes. 
King George VI Series
It was customary to display the portrait of the ruling monarch of the British Empire in cu rrency 
notes and coins issued in British colonies. The portrait may perhaps have reinforced confiden ce 
of people in the currency note conveying it is issued under the authority of the mo narchy. This 
was evident in the currency issued by the BCC in British Ceylon, which carried the portrait of the 
British Monarch. It also carried two signatures of the Commissioners of Currency. After regaining 
independence from British colonial rule in 1948, the CBSL continued with the practice of hav ing 
the portrait of His Majesty King George VI on the first currency notes issued for circulation.  The 
first note issued was on 04 January 1952 in the denomination of Rs. 10 with the date 2 0 January 
1951 and with the signatures in facsimile of J.R. Jayawardene, the Minister of Finance and of 
John Exter, the first Governor of the CBSL. The Re. 1 note was issued subsequently. Wh ile the 
other denominations of Rs. 2, Rs. 5, Rs. 50 and Rs. 100 were still in proof stage,  H.M. King 
George VI died on 06 February 1952 and the printing process of these notes ceased. 7  
Queen Elizabeth II Series
Subsequent series issued with the year 1952, in six denominations of Re.1, Rs. 2, Rs. 5,  Rs. 
10, Rs. 50 and Rs. 100 had the portrait of H.M. Queen Elizabeth II who became th e ruling 
monarch of the United Kingdom in February 1952 upon the death of her father King George 
VI. Although the front of the currency notes in series I and II carried portraits of British rulers, 
it had been the decision of the Monetary Board and Hon. J.R. Jayawardene, the Minister o f 
Finance at that time, that the rest of the designs on the notes should be typically national in 
character and with column forming at any border of the notes representing ancient Sri Lankan 
7 These proof notes can be viewed at the Money Museum of the CBSL at Rajagiriya.

PDFPAGE104
93
Currency issued by the Central Bank of Sri Lanka
architecture. In the first two series the portraits had been on the front left side of the no tes in 
keeping with the currency notes issued earlier by the BCC. The main security feature was the 
watermark of the Heraldic Lion of Ceylon (or “Sinhalese lion” as mentioned in some records) 
which was initially used in currency notes issued by the BCC and this appeared on the right sid e 
of the front of the note. The higher denomination notes of Rs. 5 and above contained intaglio 
printing from steel engraved plates.
Armorial Ensign of Ceylon Series
The year 1956 was a turning point in the political history of the country when Hon . S.W.R.D. 
Bandaranaike became Prime Minister after winning the general elections that year. Sinhala was 
made the official language in Sri Lanka and emphasis was on nationalistic policies. These changes 
also came to be reflected in the 3rd series of currency notes, where the main text on the note ( e.g. 
Central Bank of Ceylon, the legend for legal tender, face value of the note) were chang ed from 
English to Sinhala and only the denomination of the note was mentioned in Tamil and English , 
in addition to Sinhala.  This series was also the first series to reflect the independent status of Sri 
Lanka from British colonial rule. The  portrait of the British monarch on the currency  notes was 
replaced with the Armorial Ensign of Ceylon on the face of the note. 
S W R D Bandaranaike Portrait Series
The Monetary Board in 1961 had been of the view that the use of a steel engraved p ortrait (use 
of intaglio printing that gives a raised print effect) would provide the greatest measure of security 
against counterfeiting. Portraits were considered difficult to reproduce, as small variations are 
readily noticeable by the public when they acquire familiarity with the genuine presentation. This 
practice had been adopted by several countries in the world, where they had the portrait of the 

PDFPAGE105
94
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
Head of the State on the face of their currency notes. Therefore, the next series issued in 1962 
was the first note to have a portrait of a Prime Minister of Sri Lanka, the Late Mr. S W R D 
Bandaranaike who was assassinated in September 1959. During the period 1960 –1965, the Late 
Mrs. Sirimavo R.D. Bandaranaike was the Prime Minister of the country. To facilitate the scrutiny 
of notes during counting and to distinguish new notes from old notes, the portrait appeared on the 
right hand side of the notes and the water mark on the left hand side. Even up to this period, a few 
notes in the denomination of Rs. 50 and Rs. 100 with the portrait of Queen Elizabeth I I had been 
in circulation. 
King Parakramabahu Series
In 1965, on Government directives the CBSL issued a new series with the statue of King 
Parakramabahu I (1153-1186 AD), replacing the portraits on all currency notes. Other  than these 
changes the main features in the series remained somewhat the same. However, in the notes 
printed and issued from 1969, the words “Central Bank of Ceylon” which, in the earlier series, 
was only in Sinhala, was also printed in Tamil and English. 
Second Demonetisation Exercise 
By the Avoidance of Tax Act No. 26 of 1970, the 2nd demonetisation exercise of th e CBSL took 
effect not for the purposes of currency management but to prevent tax evasion as the n ame of the 
Act indicates. Accordingly, currency notes in the denomination of Rs. 100 and Rs. 50 bearing a 
date prior to 26 October 1970, ceased to be legal tender from 03 November 1970. Further, currency 
notes with the date 26 October 1970 were printed by Thomas De La Rue and Co. England  in the 
denominations of Rs. 50 and Rs. 100 with the signatures in facsimile of Late Dr. N.M.Perer a, 
Minister of Finance, and Late Mr.W.Tennakoon, Governor of the Central Bank, to replace the 
currency notes affected by the demonetisation exercise. These notes carried the portrait of the 
Late Mr. S.W.R.D.Bandaranaike with a raised hand replacing the vignette of the statue of King 
Parakramabahu the Great with changes in the designs. This issue is not considered as a separate 
series but as part of the S.W.R.D.Bandaranaike Portrait series.
Armorial Ensign of Sri Lanka Series
In 1975, the portrait of the Late Prime Minister S.W.R.D.Bandaranaike was replaced with the 
Armorial Ensign of Sri Lanka, which became the official emblem of the Government when the 
country was renamed the Republic of Sri Lanka under a new constitution promulgated on 2 2 May 
1972. This change appeared only in the currency notes of the denominations of Rs.  50 and Rs. 
100, while there was no change in design in the other denominations of Rs. 2, Rs. 5 and Rs. 10 
notes. 
PDFPAGE106
95
Currency issued by the Central Bank of Sri Lanka
Fauna and Flora Series
It was considered desirable by the CBSL to change the designs of the currency notes and the Bank 
made a major shift in the design format of the 7th series of currency notes issued in 1979. However, 
the Fauna and Flora series was short-lived and had only one order with the date 26 March  1979. 
For the first time a vertical format was used on the back of notes. A new denomination of Rs.  
20 was introduced in this series to reduce the strain on the Rs. 10 and Rs. 5 notes, which  were 
soiling fast and becoming unfit for circulation. The designs were drawn by a leading Sri L ankan 
artist specially commissioned by Bradbury Wilkinson & Co. Ltd. England and the designs in all 
denominations were changed to depict fauna, flora, birds, butterflies and fish of Sri Lanka in their 
natural environment. 
Historical and Archaeological Series
In 1980 the Government required currency notes to carry designs depicting the ancient history 
and culture of the country. Accordingly, the 8th issue of the CBSL note series carried h istorical 
and archaeological features in the designs of all denomination of notes except the Rs. 1000 n ote, 
which featured images of the Bowetenna Reservoir of the Mahaweli Scheme on the front of the 
note and the Kantalai reservoir on the back. 
The note designs had reversed once again to the earlier format of previous series. 
It was in this series that the CBSL for the first time issued two high value currency notes in 
the denominations of Rs. 500 and Rs. 1000 to relieve the pressure on the Rs. 50 and Rs. 100 
denominations, which were increasing in use. 
The Historical and Development Series
This series issued in 1987, comprised only the redesigned Rs. 500 and Rs. 1000 no tes with 
advanced security features. These notes for the first time carried the words “Central Bank of Sri 
Lanka” in English replacing the words “Central Bank of Ceylon”. The main feature on the f ront 
of the Rs.500 note was a figure of an elephant sculptured in stone from the Temple of the Tooth 
Relic, Kandy and on the back a vignette of the Abhayagiri Stupa at Anuradhapura when view ed 
vertically. The front of the Rs.1000 note features the Victoria Dam of the Mahaweli Project an d 
on the back are featured the University of Ruhuna and a peacock in the foreground . 

PDFPAGE107
96
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
Sri Lanka Heritage Series
The series, which was first introduced in 1991 and which has been the longest in circulation, 
were redesigned (all denominations) to depict Sri Lanka’s heritage and the notes included high ly 
advanced security features. Reprints in subsequent issues have included improved security 
features in the higher denomination notes such as changes in the security thread, the watermark 
with Electrotype feature (the highlighted sword of the Heraldic Lion), additional intaglio pr inting 
(raised print effect) and florescent features, to deter counterfeiting and ensure public confid ence 
in the currency. In 2005, the CBSL issued into circulation, the high value Rs. 200 0 note with 
advanced features such as the Starchrome® colour shifting security thread and Cornerstone® 
watermark, which were later introduced to the Rs. 1000 and Rs. 500 notes. The tactile bars w ith 
intaglio printing on both sides of the front of the Rs. 2000 notes, while prov iding the visually 
impaired easy recognition of the denomination also acted as a security feature.
Development, Prosperity and Sri Lanka Dancers
During a span of nearly 20 years since the issue of the last series in 1991, many changes had 
taken place internationally and in all aspects of Sri Lankan society, particularly in the Sri Lankan 
economy. With high expectations of seeing an end to terrorist activities that was impeding 
development activities in the country, the Central Bank took on the challenge to drive towards 
prosperity. One of the steps the Bank took to inspire the nation to work diligently, with  unity, to 
achieve development and prosperity was through a new series of currency notes. The concep t 
was initiated in 2007, and in 2008 the Central Bank for the first time conducted a countr y wide 
competition to select winning designs and artists for the new series. This also provided an occasion 
to obtain public opinion on currency note designs and opened the opportunity to Sri Lankan 
artists to express their creativity and aspirations. The front of the notes was designed by o ne 
winning artist and the back of the notes by the other winning artist on the theme of Develo pment, 
Prosperity and Sri Lanka Dancers. These designs were converted to currency note designs by  
the note printer and from the security paper production stage, through Lithographic, Intaglio and 
Letter Press printing stages to its final state for issue took over 100 weeks. Considering the larg e 
scale development ambitions of the economy, the denomination structure and dimensions of the 
new series were determined to facilitate payments and settlements in the new era of emerging 
economic activities and to address concerns of the public. 

PDFPAGE108
97
Currency issued by the Central Bank of Sri Lanka
This 11th series of currency notes consisting of 06 denominations, was issued on 04 February 2011 
coinciding with Independence Day celebrations and the year of the Diamond Jubilee of the CBSL. 
The main design on the front of each note depicts images relating to the passage of developmen t 
and prosperity in Sri Lanka, endemic birds and butterflies seen in the country. The back  of each 
note depicts diverse dancers in the country alongside drummers typical to the dance form, excep t 
in the case of the Rs.5000 note. The back of the notes also depict features of archeolog ical and 
cultural significance such as guard stones and floral designs. A map of Sri Lanka appears in th e 
background on the back of all the notes. The CBSL for the first time introduced a Rs.5 000 note, 
the highest value to have been issued since its establishment in 1950. Previous circulation notes 
of Rs.10 and Rs.2000 were not issued in this series. A coin in the denomination of Rs. 10 was 
issued in April 2010 to take on the demand for Rs.10 notes which have a short life sp an. The 
Rs.1000 and Rs.5000 notes are expected to meet the demand for high value denominations with 
the gradual phasing out of the Rs.2000 note. Some of the distinctive features in the series are that 
the dimensions of the notes were reduced with the width (short end) of the note being similar  in 
all notes and the length increasing by 5 millimeters from the lowest denomination to the highest. 
In addition the notes have a predominant colour for ease of recognition and advanced security 
features to ensure confidence in the legal tender.
   
  
                      
Furthermore, for the first time a limited number of Uncut Currency Sheets with a unique serial 
number and with 40 notes to a sheet were issued by CBSL as a numismatic item  in addition to 
note folders issued in this series. 
Coins Issued by the CBSL
The circulation coins issued by the CBSL after its establishment, in the denomination of cents 50,  
cents 25, cents 10, cents 05, cents 02 and cents 01, continued to have the portraits o f the British 
monarchs, even in the case of a re-mint in 1951, until 1963.

PDFPAGE109
98
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
During this period, standard circulation type commemorative coins in the denomination of 
Re. 1 and Rs. 5 to mark the 2500th Anniversary of Buddhism and the Birth of the Nation (Buddha 
Jayanthi Coins) were minted by The Royal Mint U.K. and issued by the CBSL in 1957. In  1963, 
the coins minted reflected the independent status of Sri Lanka, which had the Armorial Ensign 
of Ceylon on the face of the coin that displayed the lion in the National Flag and a crown.  The 
denominations issued were Re.1, cents 50, cents 25, cents 10, cents 5, cents 2 and cents 1. 
The next major change in coin design came in 1972, when the Armorial Ensign of Sri 
Lanka (in which the Dharma Chakra had replaced the crown) was depicted on the obverse of the 
coin in place of the Armorial Ensign of Ceylon. The word “Lanka” to identify the cou ntry, used 
on the reverse of the coin of the 1963 coinage, was replaced with the words “Sri Lank a” in 1972. 
Coins of higher denominations of Rs. 2 (copper nickel) and Rs. 5 (nickel brass) wer e minted for 
general circulation in 1984 in place of the Rs. 2 and Rs. 5 notes.
A new coinage was introduced with a change in the dimensions, weight, metals and colour 
of coins by the CBSL in 2005. The coins in the denominations of Rs. 5, Rs. 2, Re. 1, cents 50, 
and cents 25 were in various alloys on plated steel. For the first time an eleven lobed nickel plated 
steel coin in the denomination of Rs. 10 (with the year 2009) was issued into general circulatio n 
in April 2010, and this coin will replace the Rs. 10 note that has a considerably short life span 
when compared to the other notes in circulation. 
Commemorative Currency Notes and Coins Issued by the CBSL
Commemorative coins and notes are issued to mark events of international and national 
importance as well as to honour personages. These are one-time limited issues, with specific 
designs and legends unlike circulation currency. The rarity increases its intrinsic value, especially 
to collectors and numismatists. Commemorative coins have been minted in varying sizes, in high 
value metals such as gold and silver, as well as in other alloys. Some of these coins are minted 
as frosted proof (FP) type coins specially struck as collectors’ pieces not designed for circu lation. 

PDFPAGE110
99
Currency issued by the Central Bank of Sri Lanka
These are produced using highly polished dies and blanks to bring out a mirror like finish when 
struck and are individually handled. Some commemorative coins are in Brilliant Uncirculated 
(BU) condition which possesses the original mint lustre on the surface. However, if exposed to 
the atmosphere or handled, the lustre would disappear. Commemorative coins are also minted 
as standard circulation type coins which are meant for general circulation that creates greater 
awareness among the public of the event or personage commemorated. 
Since there is no record of the issue of commemorative currency in either the pre-colonial 
or the colonial period in Sri Lanka, it can be concluded that the first commemorative coin to 
be issued on record, was in 1957 by the CBSL. This was to mark the 2500th Anniver sary of 
Buddhism and the Birth of the Nation (Buddha Jayanthi Coins). Since then, the CBSL had issued  
56 commemorative coins and 02 commemorative notes to mark various events and personalities. 
The CBSL issued a Frosted Proof crown size silver commemorative coin in the denomination 
of Rs.5000 to mark its 60th Anniversary in December 2010. The obverse of the co in is multi-
coloured and it is the first multi-coloured coin to have been issued by the CBSL. The details o f 
commemorative coins and notes already issued up to August 2011 by the CBSL are listed in Table 
9.2. 
Initially, commemorative coins were issued/sold at face value. However, the necessity 
arose for legal provisions to sell the coins at a reasonable price when the metal value was higher 
than the face value of the coins. It was also necessary to recover the cost of production of the 
commemorative coins/notes and all related expenses, including the cost of encasing the coins/notes 
in attractive presentation boxes/folders. Accordingly, the MLA was amended in 1998, and this 
enabled the CBSL, with the approval of the Minister in charge of the subject of Finance, to issue 
commemorative currency notes and coins and sell them at a price higher than the denomination 
specified in such note or coin.8
8 Monetary Law Act (Amendment) Act No.6 of 1998, Section 52A

PDFPAGE111
100
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
Commemorative Notes 
In 1998, the CBSL, to commemorate 50 years of Independence of Sri Lanka, issued into circulation, 
for the first time, a polymer banknote in the denomination of Rs. 200 which was printed  by Note 
Printing, Australia. The main feature of the note on the front is the Independence Squar e and 
pictorial themes depicting the economic development of Sri Lanka since Independence. The back 
of the note depicts pictorial themes in sequence of the history of the country from the visit of 
Prince Vijaya to Sri Lanka up to the British period.
The second commemorative bank note was issued after 11 years, in November 2009, in the 
denomination of Rs. 1000, following the end of the nearly 30 year war against ter rorism, on the 
theme “Ushering of Peace and Prosperity to Sri Lanka”. The theme on the front of the no te is one 
country and one nation in harmony, progressing towards prosperity, under th e leadership of His 
Excellency the President, Mahinda Rajapaksa. The reverse of the note depicts pictorial themes 
of the turning points of the humanitarian operations and the valiant contributions of the security 
forces and the police in accomplishing their target. This note was printed by De La Rue Lanka 
Currency and Security Print (Private) Ltd.

PDFPAGE112
101
Currency issued by the Central Bank of Sri Lanka
Table 9.2
Commemorative Coins and Notes Issued by the Central Bank of Sri Lanka up to August 2011
 No. Description Year on 
Coin
Face Value 
(Rs.)
Metal/ 
Substrate
1 2500th Anniversary of Buddhism and Birth of the Nation (2500 
Buddha Jayanthi) – (C) 1957 5 Silver
2 2500th Anniversary of Buddhism and birth of the nation (2500 
Buddha Jayanthi) – (C) 1957 1 Cu/Ni
3 Special Coin Issue of the Food and Agriculture Organisation 
(FAO) – (C) 1968 2 Cu/Ni
4 5th Non - Aligned Summit – (C) 1976 5 Ni 
5 5th Non - Aligned Summit – (C) 1976 2 Cu/Ni
6 1st Executive Presidency (J R Jayawardene) – (C) 1978 1 Cu/Ni
7 1st Executive Presidency (J R Jayawardene) – (FP) 1978 1 Gold 22 k
8 50 Years of Universal Adult Franchise – (C) 1981 5 Cu/Ni
9 The Mahaweli Development Scheme – (C) 1981 2 Cu/Ni
10 International Year of Shelter for the Homeless – (C) 1987 10 Cu/Ni
11 International Year of Shelter for the Homeless – (FP) 1987 10 Cu/Ni
12 40th Anniversary of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka – (BU) 1990 500 Silver
13 40th Anniversary of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka – (FP) 1990 500 Silver
14 5th South Asian Federation Games - Colombo – (FP) 1991 500 Go ld 12k
15 5th South Asian Federation Games - Colombo – (FP) 1991 100 Silver
16 3rd Anniversary of Induction of Executive Presidency  
(R Premadasa) – (C) 1992 1 Cu/Ni
17 3rd Anniversary of Induction of Executive Presidency  
(R Premadasa) – (FP) 1992 1 Cu/Ni
18 3rd Anniversary of Induction of Executive Presidency  
(R Premadasa) – (FP) 1992 1 Silver
19 3rd Anniversary of Induction of Executive Presidency  
(R Premadasa) – (FP) 1992 1 Gold 22k
20 2300 Anubudu Mihindu Jayanthi – (FP) 1993 500 Silver
21 50th Anniversary of the Food and Agricultural Organisation 
(FAO) – (C) 1995 2 Cu/Ni
22 50th Anniversary of the United Nations Organisation – (C) 199 5 5 Ni/Br
23 50th Anniversary of the United Nations Organisation – (FP) 19 95 5 Ni/Br
24 50th Anniversary of the UNICEF – (C) 1996 1 Cu/Ni
25 50th Anniversary of Sri Lanka regaining Independence – (FP) 1998 5000 Gold 22k
26 50th Anniversary of Sri Lanka regaining Independence – (FP) 1998 1000 Silver
27 50th Anniversary of Sri Lanka regaining Independence – (C) 1998 10
Ni/Br, Cu/
Ni, Bi-metal
PDFPAGE113
102
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
28 50th Anniversary of Sri Lanka regaining Independence 
(Banknote) – (C) 1998 200 Polymer
29 Winning of the 1996 Cricket World Cup – (FP) 1999 1000 Silver
30 Winning of the 1996 Cricket World Cup – (C) 1999 5 Ni/Br
31 50th Anniversary of Sri Lanka Army – (FP) 1999 1 NPS
32 50th Anniversary of Sri Lanka Army – (BU) 1999 1 NPS
33 50th Anniversary of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka – (FP) 2000 1000 Silver
34 50th Anniversary of Sri Lanka Navy – (FP) 2000 1 Cu/Ni
35 50th Anniversary of Sri Lanka Navy – (BU) 2000 1 NPS
36 50th Anniversary of Sri Lanka Air Force – (FP) 2001 1 Cu/Ni
37 50th Anniversary of the Colombo Plan – (C) 2001 2 Cu/Ni
38 250th Anniversary of Syamopasampadawa (Portrait of Welivita 
Sri Saranankara Mahimi ) – (C) 2003 5 Ni/Br
39 250th Anniversary of  Syamopasampadawa (Portrait of Phrvara 
Upali Nahimi) – (C) 2003 5 Ni/Br
40 2550th Anniversary of the passing away of Buddha (2550 
Buddha Jayanthi) – (FP) 2006 1500 Silver
41 2550th Anniversary of the passing away of Buddha (2550 
Buddha Jayanthi) – (FP) 2006 2000
Silver/
selective 
Gold plated
42 2550th Anniversary of the passing away of Buddha(2550 Buddha 
Jayanthi)-(C) 2006 5 BPS
43 Cricket World Cup (Runners – up) – (BU) 2007 1000 NPS
44 Cricket World Cup (Runners – up) – (C) 2007 5 BPS
45 50th Anniversary of Employees’ Provident Fund – (BU) 2008 100 0 NPS
46 50th Anniversary of Employees’ Provident Fund – (FP) 2008 100 0 NPS
47 50th Anniversary of Employees’ Provident Fund – (C) 2008 2 NPS
48 Bicentennial Celebrations of Sri Lanka Customs – (FP) 2009 200 Silver
49 60th Anniversary of the Sri Lanka Army – (BU) 2009 1000 Silver
50 60th Anniversary of the Sri Lanka Army – (BU) 2009 1000 Cu/Ni
51 Ushering of Peace and Prosperity to Sri Lanka- (Banknote) – (C) 2009 10 00 Cotton  
52 60th Anniversary of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka – (FP) 2010 5000 Silver
53 60th Anniversary of Sri Lanka Air Force – (C ) 2011 2 NPS
54 2600th Sambuddhathwa Jayanthi - (FP) 2011 1000 Silver
55 2600th Sambuddhathwa Jayanthi - (C) 2011 10 NPS
56 50th Anniversary of People’s Bank - (FP) 2011 1000
Silver/
selective 
Gold plated
Notes: 
C = Circulation, FP=Frosted Proof, BU= Brilliant Uncirculated, Cu/Ni= Copper Nickel,  
Ni=Nickel, Ni/Br= Nickel Brass, NPS= Nickel Plated Steel, BPS= Brass Plated Steel 
PDFPAGE114
103
Currency issued by the Central Bank of Sri Lanka
Printing of Currency Notes and Minting of Coins  
for the CBSL    
Prior to the establishment of the CBSL, currency notes had been printed for the Board o f 
Commissioners of Currency by Thomas De La Rue & Co. England and with the commencement 
of World War II, at the India Government Security Press. The Ceylon Government Press to o had 
printed emergency subsidiary notes during the War period. The first series of currency notes for the 
CBSL had been printed by Bradbury Wilkinson & Co. of the United Kingdom and the company 
continued to be selected from among other competitive currency suppliers for a considerable 
period of time to print CBSL currency notes. In 1983, a joint venture for secur ity printing was 
established between Bradbury Wilkinson (PLC) of U.K. and the Government of Sri Lanka, 
which was incorporated as Bradbury, Wilkinson Lanka (Private) Ltd. (BWLP). In 198 7, BWLP 
commenced operations at the Export Processing Zone in Biyagama and since 1988 had printed 
and supplied the currency notes of the CBSL commencing with the Historical and Development 
series of currency notes. Meanwhile, Thomas De La Rue England (TDLR) had changed its nam e 
to The De La Rue Company Ltd in 1958 and had by 1986 acquired Bradbury Wilkinson and Co. 
Ltd. England. The name BWLP was subsequently renamed Thomas De La Rue Lanka (Private) 
Ltd., in December 1990 and (since 1998 ) presently functions as De La Rue Lanka Cu rrency and 
Security Print (Private) Ltd., under the parent company De La Rue plc in the U.K. which h as a 
history of nearly 150 years in currency note printing.     
The CBSL had obtained its circulation coin requirements up to 1957 from the Indian 
Government Mints in Bombay and Calcutta and The Royal Mint, United Kingdom, as was 
done by the Board of Commissioners of Currency.  Since 1957, the CBSL had obtained  its coin 
supplies from The Royal Mint, with the exception of the supply of cents 50 coin ord er of 1996, 
which was minted by the Royal Canadian Mint. The Commemorative coins issued by the CBSL 
also had been minted by The Royal Mint with the exception of the coin to commemorate the 
50th Anniversary of the Sri Lanka Navy in 2000, which was minted by Monnaie de Par is. The 
Royal Mint which has a history of over 1000 years of minting coins was initially located at th e 
Tower of London and then at Tower Hill London. It  moved to its present location  at Llantrisant, 
South Wales, in 1968. It functioned as a department of Her Majesty’s Treasury in the U. K., until 
December 2009 and changed its status to a wholly government owned company, The Royal Min t 
Ltd., in January 2010.   
Money Museums of the CBSL    
With a view to contributing to knowledge in the field of money, for education, study , and 
pleasure, the CBSL has established 03 Money museums since its establishment. These museums 
trace the historical evolution of money and display currency that was in use in Sri Lanka (sin ce 
the 3rd Century BC up to the present day), currencies in other countries and prov ide information 
on the minting and printing process of currency. These museums also disseminate information 
PDFPAGE115
104
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
on counterfeit note detection and the importance of efficient use of currency. The first museu m 
was initially opened at the CBSL Head Office in Colombo Fort on 20 April 1982. It was moved 
to the premises of the Centre for Banking Studies of the CBSL at Rajagiriya in 1989 and w as 
modernised in 2009. The second museum was opened on 05 September 2008 at the premises 
of the Provincial Office of the CBSL at Anuradhapura in the North Central Province and the 
3rd museum was opened on 06 May 2010 at the Provincial Office of the CBSL at Matara in th e 
Southern Province. While this service of the CBSL is provided free of charge, the museums h ave 
grown to be centres of education frequently visited by students, researchers and numismatists.  
 
References:    
de Silva, G.P.S.H. History of Coins and Currency in Sri Lanka: 3rd Century BC to 1998 AD. Colombo: Central Bank of 
Sri Lanka, 2000.
Government of Ceylon. “Avoidance of Tax Act No. 26.” 1970.
---. “Monetary Law Act No. 58.” 1949.
Salley, T.M.U. Sri Lanka Currency of Recent Times: 1938-1985. Colombo: Central Bank of Sri Lanka, 1986.
 
PDFPAGE116
105
Introduction
Exchange controls, i.e., controls on specific foreign exchange transactions or case-by-case b asis 
approvals for certain international financial transactions have generally been imposed to restrict 
the use of foreign exchange for international financial transactions. Many countries have reso rted 
to exchange controls with the outbreak of the World War II as an attempt to preserve th e foreign 
exchange resources in the face of the devastation caused by the war. Hence, in the late 1930s, 
widespread trade restrictions and capital controls were introduced as emergency measures to 
arrest the depletion of international reserves and allow for the import of much needed goo ds. As 
economies recovered after ending the war, a number of advanced countries removed exchang e 
controls although exchange controls survived in many developing countries. The gener al belief in 
the 1960s and 1970s was that controls were needed to ensure necessary protection against adverse 
external shocks and preserve the independence of national policies.
In Sri Lanka too, the initial exchange controls were introduced under the Defence (Finance) 
Regulations that were passed in 1939. However, there has been a gradual and focused relaxation  
of exchange controls since 1977, which was an integral component of overall liberalised economic 
B.D.W.A. Silva
Assistant Governor
Foreign Exchange Transactions: 
From Controls to Relaxation
The author wishes to thank Mr. P Samarasiri, Assistant Governor, for an early draft of the paper.
10
PDFPAGE117
106
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
policy pursued, to achieve a greater efficiency in the conduct of international financial transactions 
and to enhance overall competitiveness of the economy to sustain a high rate of economic growth. 
At present, all international transactions of current nature are free of exchange controls while 
many of the capital transactions too are largely free of exchange controls. The authorities hav e, 
however, taken a gradual approach in relaxing exchange controls on capital transactions given  
the macroeconomic risks that could arise from the adverse effects of abrupt movement of large 
capital inflows and outflows and the necessity of safeguarding monetary and financial stability.
A series of further relaxations are to be introduced, having in place the prudential 
regulations and a market surveillance mechanism on foreign exchange transactions to promote 
investor confidence, market discipline and stability.
Early Measures of Exchange Control
After the establishment of the CBSL, the administration of Exchange Control function was 
entrusted to the Monetary Board with effect from 01 September 1950. The Exchange Co ntrol 
Act was enacted on 16 August 1953 empowering the CBSL to administer exchange controls. 
At present, the provisions of the Exchange Control Act and the Monetary Law Act together 
provide the CBSL with a wide spectrum of discretionary powers to regulate the country’s for eign 
exchange operations in the country. 
The high commodity prices associated with the Korean boom in 1950 made possible Sri 
Lanka to raise the external assets recording a favourable balance of payment situation in the 
country. However, this situation had changed subsequently and with the continuing decline in  
external assets along with rising imports, exchange controls had been tightened in 1952. Th e 
regulations that permitted remittances without prior approval of the Exchange Control authorities 
on account of maintenance, travel, charity and other current purposes were withdrawn in September 
1952, and lower exemption limits were fixed. Subsequently the limits were progressively revised 
downward and by the end of that year exchange controls were considerably restricted. 
The balance of payments situation had aggravated further from late 1950. The net outflo w 
of capital on account of sale of British investments had grown steadily in the decade after 
independence adding further complication to the BOP situation. While official capital flows 
became significant after the 50’s, this was not sufficient to offset the large outflow of private 
long term capital. In 1961, number of items, which were previously under Open Gener al Licence 
were brought under import control. Further, several items were banned, by using the simple 
expedient of not issuing any licences for them. Further, import restrictions were imposed in 
February, July and September 1962. By this time all items of import, other than food stuffs, fuel, 
fertiliser, petroleum products and drugs were under import control. Import controls underwent a 
radical change in October 1962 when a scheme of individual licensing applicable to nearly the 
whole range of imports was introduced. In 1964 and 1965, in the face of a d eteriorating foreign 
exchange situation, import controls were tightened fu rther. 
PDFPAGE118
107
Foreign Exchange Transactions: From Controls to Relaxation
A significant departure from the control regime followed thus far was the introduction of 
the Foreign Exchange Entitlement Certificate (FEECs) scheme in May 1968. This scheme had two 
main objectives – one was to promote and diversify exports, the other was to liberalise imports and 
to move away from the system of quotas and stringent controls. All foreign transactions (exp orts, 
imports and invisible transactions) were classified under two categories. The FEECs scheme was 
designed to provide a cash incentive to selected exports and invisible transactions, and to impose 
an additional rupee cost on selected imports and invisible payments. All other foreign receipts 
and payments were to be transacted at the official exchange rate. Under this scheme FEECs were 
issued to exporters who surrendered foreign exchange to commercial banks against non traditional 
exports. Exports of tea, rubber, coconut and coconut products were, therefor e, not eligible, under 
this scheme. 
Further liberalisation was seen in 1972, when a certain percentage of the gross earnings 
of the exporters of certain minor and non-traditional exports was allowed to be retained as an 
incentive in the form of Convertible Rupee Accounts (CRA) to be used towards the importation 
of specified goods and payments for specified services. The oil crisis in 1973 and the resultin g 
balance of payments difficulties compelled a significant tightening of exchange controls and 
controls for both current and capital transactions were introduced and prevailed until 1977. During 
this period transactions relating to both exports and imports, as well as other foreign exch ange 
payments, required the permission of the Controller of Exchange.
Although the BOP difficulties and resulting pressure on external reserve position required 
governments to impose controls, severe control clearly had several disadvantages. The exchange 
control involves extra costs of administration and may delay or interfere unduly with trade and 
other productive activities in the economy. These inevitably give rise to attempted evasion, 
which may, if unchecked, lead to concealed losses of exchange, black market exchange rates and 
other undesirable features. Further, because some could always seek to exploit legal as well as 
illegal loopholes, there could be a tendency for controls to breed further controls. The removal of 
restrictions on current international transactions and certain capital account transactions beginning 
1977 reflected the recognition of the merits of international trade and benefits of capital flows o n 
the domestic economy and the need to create a conducive environment to facilitate private sector 
led economic activity.
Gradual Liberalisation since End 1977
A significant relaxation of exchange controls had been implemented in late 1977 as a part of 
the substantial policy initiative to free the economy from administrative controls. At the same 
time, the exchange entitlements for travel, business, medical treatment, education and emigration, 
were increased and the authority to grant exchange for selected current account transactions 
was delegated to commercial banks. Accordingly, foreign exchange for passage and exchange 
PDFPAGE119
108
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
in respect of travel on holiday, business, official duty, payment for subscriptions, remittan ces on 
account of export commissions, payment of profits and dividends were delegated to commercial 
banks. Meanwhile, the determination of exchange rate has gradually been based on the market 
forces by moving to a managed floating exchange rate system since November 1977. 
A series of further measures had been taken to improve the institutional mechanism to 
facilitate trade financing, promote foreign private investment and encourage inward remittances. 
Accordingly, commercial banks were allowed to operate Foreign Currency Banking Units 
(FCBUs) from 1979 with the objective of developing the off-shore market in Sri Lanka and to 
provide financing facilities in foreign currency to industries in the Export Processing Zo nes. 
Commercial banks were also permitted to open accounts for non-resident Sri Lankans, who had 
foreign exchange earnings from a period of residency abroad, and for foreign nationals. Exporters 
were permitted to borrow from Foreign Currency Banking Units (FCBUs) for financing inpu ts to 
execute export orders. The Resident Non-national Foreign Currency (RNNFC) Account Scheme, 
which permitted non-nationals resident in Sri Lanka to maintain foreign currency accounts, was 
introduced.  
Exchange controls were further liberalised beginning 1990 simplifying the procedures an d 
delegating more exchange control functions to commercial banks. The outflows associated with 
these inflows, such as interest, profits, sale proceeds and dividends were made completely free of 
any restriction. All current earnings of NRIs in the form of dividends, rent, etc have been made 
fully repatriable. Permission was granted in 1990 to approved country funds, regio nal funds and 
non-resident individuals to invest in shares in listed companies up to 40 per cent of the issu ed 
share capital. The 100 per cent Transfer Tax on such purchases was abolished at the same time. 
With this, a scheme of Share Investment External Rupee Accounts (SIERA) was introduced 
through Authorised Dealers, to facilitate and monitor such investments enabling Sri Lankan 
residents who received foreign currency, to maintain foreign currency accounts, and commer cial 
banks were permitted to open Resident Foreign Currency (RFC) accounts, in 1991. 
In 1992, approved country funds, regional funds, non-resident individ uals, and corporate 
bodies incorporated outside Sri Lanka were permitted to increase their investment in shares 
in listed companies from 40 per cent of the issued share capital up to 100 per cent, subject to 
exclusions, limitations and conditions set out by the Controller of Exchange. The repatriatio n and 
surrender requirements in respect of export proceeds were abolished in 1993. Expor t proceeds 
were permitted to be retained in foreign currency accounts either in Sri Lanka or abroad . 
The remaining restrictions on payments in respect of travel, education expenses overseas and 
remittances for miscellaneous purposes were removed. 
A major departure in the exchange control regime had been the acceptance of the Article VIII 
of the IMF Articles of Agreement under which all remaining restrictions on current international 
transactions were removed in March 1994 and a series of capital account liberalisation measures 
PDFPAGE120
109
Foreign Exchange Transactions: From Controls to Relaxation
were introduced thereafter. In 1995, commercial banks were permitted to obtain foreign loan s up 
to 5 per cent of their capital and reserves, introducing some relaxation on the capital account. This 
was raised to 15 per cent with the introduction of foreign currency loans to non-BOI  exporters in 
1997. Permission was also granted more freely to private sector firms on a case by case basis to 
undertake investments in foreign countries in 1996. In 1997, commercial banks were per mitted 
to provide foreign currency loans to non-BOI exporters, from either their domestic units or from 
their FCBUs, subject to some safeguards. In 2000, limitations for investment by non residents in 
the banking (up to 60 per cent), insurance (up to 90 per cent) and stock b rokering (up to 100 per 
cent) were further relaxed. 
A series of further relaxations have been undertaken during the last decade to grant 
greater flexibility for residents and non-resident Sri Lankans to maintain their earnings abro ad 
in foreign currency and to promote investments including investments in government securities. 
Some measures to grant greater flexibility for Sri Lankan resident individuals, corporate and 
unincorporated bodies to maintain their earnings abroad in foreign currency, invest in  equity of 
overseas companies include:
• RANSI Accounts for non-resident Sri Lankans introduced in 2001 to promote inv estment 
in real and financial assets. 
• Permission granted in 2003 for Sri Lankans employed abroad to obtain foreign currency 
loans, against the security of their NRFC Accounts balances and repayment to be made in 
foreign currency. 
• Permission for Shipping/Airline agents to maintain foreign currency accounts on behalf 
of their principals.
• Promotion for exporters to pay sea/air freight in foreign currency from fun ds in their 
foreign currency accounts. 
• Introduction of a Indirect Exporters Foreign Currency Accounts (IEFCA) scheme to 
allow indirect exporters to receive payments in foreign currency from direct exporters in 
2005. 
• Introduction of a Foreign Currency Account for Gem and Jewellery Exporters to f acilitate 
foreign exchange requirements of the Gem and Jewellery Export sector.
• Introduction of a Special Foreign Investment Deposit Account to facilitate permitted 
non resident parties to open and maintain Time/Savings deposits (in DBU) in designated 
foreign currency and Sri Lanka rupees. 
• Permission was granted to amalgamate funds in NRFC, RFC, SFIDA, Investments in T/
Bonds and Foreign Currency Fixed Deposit for Dual Citizenship applicants. 
PDFPAGE121
110
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
• Granting permission for authorised dealers to release total balance to the credit of existing 
non-resident block accounts as at 01 July 2008 and outward remittance of US dollars 
20,000 per annum from block accounts operative after 01 July 2008.
• Permission to Sri Lankan resident individuals, corporate and unincorporated bodies to 
invest in equity of overseas companies.
• Permission to insurance companies to invest a part of their assets abroad; and
• Permission for Sri Lankan companies to open and maintain overseas offices.
Steps taken to promote investments including investments in government securities include:
• Issue of Sri Lanka Development Bonds (SLDB) denominated in US dollars by 
government. 
• Introduction of Treasury Bond Investment External Rupee Account (TIERA) in 20 06, to 
facilitate approved non resident parties to invest in rupee denominated Treasury Bonds 
up to 5 per cent of outstanding Treasury Bonds at any given time and this Permitted 
limit for non-resident investment in Treasury Bonds was increased up to 10 per cent of 
outstanding Treasury Bonds at any given time.
• Permission for Authorised dealers to accept third party foreign currency deposits subject 
to a limit of US dollars 1,000 (or its equivalent) per transaction in 2007.
•  Introduction of Treasury bill Investment External Rupee Account - Deshabhimani 
(TIERA – 2), in 2008, to facilitate permitted foreign parties to invest in rupee denominated 
Treasury bills up to 10 per cent of outstanding Treasury bills at any given time. 
• Permission for migrants up to a maximum of US dollars 150,000 (including personal 
effects) at the time of their departure from Sri Lanka; and
• Introduction of “Treasury bill/bond Investment External Rupee Account - Deshabhimani 
(TIERA – D)”, to facilitate Sri Lankans living abroad to invest in rupee denominated 
Treasury Bonds up to 10 per cent of outstanding Treasury bills and Treasury bonds at any 
given time. 
Under general permission to further facilitate investments by non-residents, the steps have been 
taken to grant:
• Permission for foreigners to invest in Rupee Denominated Debentures issued by local 
companies with effect from November 2010.
• Permission for foreign companies to open places of business in Sri Lanka. 
• Permission to foreigners on tour or business in Sri Lanka to open accounts in fo reign 
currency. 
PDFPAGE122
111
Foreign Exchange Transactions: From Controls to Relaxation
Benefits and Risks of Capital Account Convertibility
Sri Lanka has been following a gradual approach in relaxing the capital account transactions. I n 
view of the decline in external financing the particularly from official sources, i.e., bilateral and 
multilateral agencies, the need to finance gap in savings-investment, and increasing sophistication 
of investors making it much easier to move capital around under different guises, capital-accoun t 
liberalisation was considered as an important and inevitable step to benefit from increasing 
globalisation and increased movement of capital flows. But, the premature full convertibility of 
the capital account is considered to be dangerous without adequate safeguards. Accordingly, a 
series of sequential measures were taken to promote different forms of capital flows across the 
country’s borders, i.e., foreign direct investment (FDI), portfolio flows (including  investment in 
equities), and bank borrowing.  
In fact, there are numerous benefits as well as risks in liberalising the capital account. In a 
developing country like Sri Lanka, the savings-investment gap is usually a common phenomeno n 
and is generally reflected in the continued current account deficits. The flow of capital would then 
reduce the cost of capital, increase investment, and also facilitate domestic liquidity management, 
which will bolster domestic economic activity by reducing the cost of raising capital for 
investment and raising the output. 
An increasing number of countries have encouraged foreign direct investments (FDIs), 
which could facilitate the transfer of foreign technological and managerial know-how and 
encourage competition and financial development, thereby promoting growth. Countries also 
favour FDI, as they are relatively long term and not subject to rapid reversals associated with 
changes in investor sentiment. Moreover, business cycles, in general, are not synchronised 
across countries, and the capital flows can offset volatility, which could otherwise have arisen 
in countries’ own national incomes. Hence, inflows stemming from liberal capital flows should 
contribute to contain output volatility. 
The fluctuations in international capital flows, particularly reversal of short-term capital 
inflows can have adverse macroeconomic shocks. International investors may tend to pull back in  
bad times, thereby amplifying the swings in the domestic macroeconomy. It has been found that 
the premature opening of the capital account also poses serious risks on the smooth functioning of 
the financial intermediation. The high levels of short-term liabilities intermediated by the financial 
system also create risks of bank runs and systemic financial crises when the financial sector is 
weakly regulated. 
Conclusion
Having liberalised all the current international transactions in March 1994, Sri Lanka has been 
following a gradual liberalisation of capital account transactions, considering the risks associated 
with full convertibility without adequate safeguards. Sri Lanka has already benefitted in a number 
PDFPAGE123
112
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
of different ways following the measures taken to increase capital flows by way of partially 
liberalising the capital account. Increased inflows have contributed to expand and strengthen the 
efficiency and reduce volatility in the foreign exchange and money markets. At the same time, the 
careful mix of external sector and financial sector reforms have contributed to the sustained rise in 
foreign exchange reserves and improved the confidence of investors in the Sri Lankan eco nomy. 
The country’s improved economic fundamentals, strong and resilient domestic financial 
sector as well as the effective and comprehensive surveillance framework, have provided necessary 
space for further liberalisation of the capital account. Moreover, the country’s strong trade and 
financial inter-linkages with the regional and global economies and the need to accelerate growth 
taking into account the new regional and global challenges, makes it necessary to review the 
remaining controls in order to continue to attract capital flows. 
At the same time, necessary checks and balances that facilitate legitimate business should 
be in place while making effective due diligence possible. For instance, with a view to addressing 
macroeconomic consequences of large capital flows, some countries have recently used selective 
capital controls. An implicit tax on capital inflows, which are reversed within less than a year has 
been imposed to induce a shift from shorter- to longer-term inflows. Therefore, Sri L anka will 
also continue to pursue a strategy of further liberalising the capital account to harness the fu ll 
potential of the Sri Lankan economy while promoting a sound and stable financial system as well 
as a resilient and competitive economy. This comprehensive approach will be the key towards 
achieving a balanced and sustainable growth with greater stability.
PDFPAGE124
113
Introduction
During the last 60 years, the size of foreign reserves of the country, reserves management 
techniques adopted as well as the knowledge base have expanded significantly. Foreign reserves 
of the country have surged to an unprecedented level during the past one and a half years with 
the improved investor confidence after the end of the 30-year long conflict and stable econ omic 
and political conditions of the country. These reserves should be properly managed in order to 
facilitate the country to meet its foreign obligations and be invested prudently to generate income. 
The maintenance of adequate reserves is also crucial to preserve the external value and the 
stability of the Sri Lankan currency. 
What are Foreign Exchange Reserves?
Foreign reserves are assets or claims that a country holds in a foreign soil. These assets fall into 
a wide variety of instruments ranging from short-term claims in money markets to long-term 
investments. Foreign assets are mainly held and managed by the monetary authority or a central 
bank. In certain countries such as Singapore, the responsibility of managing foreign r eserves lies 
with institutions specially designed for that purpose. Accordingly, foreign reserves are jointly  
managed by the Monetary Authority of Singapore and the Government Investment Corporation in 
Singapore. In Sri Lanka, the Central Bank of Sri Lanka (CBSL) is the sole authority empo wered 
by law to manage the international reserves of the country.
Managing Sri Lanka’s Foreign Reserves
H.A. Karunaratne,
Director, International Operations Department
11
PDFPAGE125
114
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
Legal Framework of Reserves Management
The Monetary Law Act (MLA), the Act under which the bank was established, provides the 
framework for deployment of the foreign currency assets and gold, defining the br oad parameters 
in respect of currencies, instruments, issuers and counter parties in its Section 67. In brief,  MLA 
permits the following assets categories to be maintained in its foreign assets.
 (i) Gold;
 (ii) Assets in foreign currencies in the form of –
  a. Documents and instruments of types customarily employed for the international  
   transfer of funds; or
  b. Demand and time deposits in central banks, treasuries, and commercial banks  
   abroad; or
  c. Securities of foreign Governments; or
  d. Foreign notes and coins; and
 (iii) Special Drawing Rights in the International Monetary Fund. 
The Monetary Board, the governing body responsible for making all policy decision s 
related to the management, operation and administration of the CBSL, may direct to hold 
international reserves in gold or currencies freely convertible into gold particularly considering 
the prospects of stability and convertibility of the currencies as well as the anticipated demand for 
such currencies. It may also direct to further widen the scope of reserves management activities 
to enhance the safety, liquidity and return objectives of reserves management. Accordingly, with a 
view to further streamline the portfolio management activities, the CBSL has framed appropriate 
guidelines stipulating stringent criteria for issuers, counterparty investments, maturity profile and 
risk monitoring, which have been approved by the Monetary Board.
Objectives of Foreign Reserves Management
Since independence, primary goals of reserves management continue to be safety and liquidity 
while a significant focus has been placed on return objectives.
Safety, Liquidity and Return
Safety of the investments and the capital preservation are the most important aspects of any 
investment that cannot be compromised. This is simply to say whether the funds invested are 
available as and when required without depleting its value. Central banks in general invest  
funds in highly credible instruments and countries, even though they generate a low return with 
PDFPAGE126
115
Managing Sri Lanka’ s Foreign Reserves
a view to ensure the safety of its investments. Liquidity is also a major concern as it is important 
to avoid any default or reputational risk, which is the essence of banking. This is the ab ility to 
obtain funds as and when they required at short notice without incurring an undue cost. Return 
is required to service the reserves and to earn an income in order to maintain the value of the 
investments.
Why Reserves should be Managed
Managing reserves is paramount as to: 
• Support and maintain confidence in the policies for monetary and exchange rate 
management including the capacity to intervene in support of the national currency, i.e., 
demonstrate the backing of domestic currency by external assets,
• Limit external vulnerability by maintaining foreign currency liquidity to absorb shocks 
during times of crisis, 
• Support for the country’s external transactions i.e. exports and imports of goo ds, services 
and financial capital as well as financial transfers,
• Provide a level of confidence to markets that the country can meet its external obligations,
• Assist the government in meeting its foreign exchange needs and external debt obligations 
and maintain a reserve for national disasters or emergencies,
• The accumulation of reserves may involve a financial cost, hence the effective utilisation 
of the reserves is crucial and it has heightened the need of managing reserves prudently. 
Sources and Uses of Reserves
Accumulation of reserves in the recent past occurred mainly on account of purchases of Dollars in 
the local foreign exchange market. Continuous inflow of funds to the government secur ities due 
to increased investor confidence also made a significant contribution. Furthermore, remittances 
from Sri Lankan Diaspora, migrant worker remittances, Stand-By Arrangement Facility received 
from the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and proceeds from the sovereign bon d issues and 
foreign loans and grants were the other significant contributors to the enhanced reserves. I ncome 
generated from the investments of the enhanced foreign reserves has also increased remarkably in 
the recent past due to active reserves management policies employed by the CBSL. 
The major outflows that decreased the reserves were debt service payments and repayment 
of foreign borrowings and foreign exchange sales to the domestic market to meet demand for 
import of goods and services. 
PDFPAGE127
116
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
Evolution of Reserve Management
(a) Reserve Adequacy
Sri Lanka’s approach to reserves management in the early days was essentially based on the 
traditional approach, i.e., to maintain an appropriate level of import cover defined in terms of 
reserves equivalent to a number of months of imports. Thus, the emphasis on import cov er 
constituted the primary concern, until the economy was liberalised in 1977. 
Subsequently, there were several changes to the external sector policy with a large 
number of international transactions and payment liabilities arising in areas other than import 
of commodities. The liabilities included discharging short-term debt obligations and servicing 
of medium-term debt. In addition exchange rate management was also encompassed within the 
purview of reserves management. These changes necessitated a major shift in the approach to 
reserves management. 
The focus in deciding on the level of reserves was in fact shifted to ensuring a reasonable 
level of confidence in the international financial and trading communities about the capacity of 
the country to honour its obligations and maintain trade and financial flows; the amount of foreign 
currency reserves required to counter speculative tendencies or anticipatory actions amongst 
players in the foreign exchange market, and the capacity to maintain the reserves so that the cost 
of carrying liquidity is minimal.
In 1977, with the introduction of the managed floating exchange rate regime, a furth er 
change in the approach to reserves management was warranted and the emphasis on import cover 
was supplemented by the objective of smoothing out the volatility in the exchange rate through  
market intervention. 
In this context, the traditional approach of assessing adequacy of reserves in terms of 
import cover has been broadened to include a number of parameters that take into account the 
size, composition, and risk profiles of various types of capital flows, as well as external shocks to 
which the economy is vulnerable. In the meantime the prevalent bullish economic environment 
in Sri Lanka with strong investor interests and prospects for an acceleration in economic activity 
further underscores the need for strong reserves.
(b) Reserve Management
The Sterling Area began in early 1930’s when a group of countries of the British emp ire (except 
Canada, Hong Kong and Newfoundland which joined Canada in 1949 to become Canada’s tenth  
province) and few others decided in favour of a stable exchange rate in Sterling since it was the 
most widely used currency in international trade. Ceylon was a member of the Sterling Area and 
PDFPAGE128
117
Managing Sri Lanka’ s Foreign Reserves
as a result it was bound to follow some of the Sterling Area’s common practices in maintaining 
reserves such as maintaining a greater portion of reserves in Sterling and pooling earnings in 
Gold and US Dollars to a central pool. 
During the early years of 1950, Sri Lanka had a large amount of foreign reserves 
accumulated due to the rubber and tea price boom with the Korean War. This caused an enormous 
liquidity in the system and the government had to discourage inflows to the country. In 1954, after 
a series of discussions between Ceylon and Britain, Ceylon was allowed to maintain its reserves 
independently in Dollars and gold in addition to Sterling, subject to an upper limit. The excess 
Dollar earnings above the upper limit were subjected to transfer into the central Dollar pool, 
which was a significant feature of the Sterling Area. Under the Sterling Dollar pool arrangement, 
member countries were required to contribute to the pool using their excess Dollar earnings and 
allowed to draw from the pool for their requirements. Due to the subsequent negotiations, Britain 
agreed to increase the upper limit of Dollar holdings at frequent intervals. 
The strong external reserves position gradually evaporated due to expansive fiscal policies 
of successive governments that led to a continuous expansion in imports. It declined from US 
Dollars 233 million in 1956 to US Dollars 90 million by 1960. Reserves declined further to US 
Dollars 42 million in 1970, which were sufficient to finance 2.1 months of imports. Payments for 
imports of goods and services were controlled by a variety of exchange control measures during 
this period to protect the depleting reserves. A system of dual exchange rate was introduced in  
1968 and continued with an ‘official’ rate for traditional exports and ‘essential’ imports and a 
much depreciated rate for other exports and imports to encourage export diversification an d 
discourage non essential imports. In 1974, the Asian Clearing Union (ACU) was formed to further 
economise the use of foreign exchange by a group of six countries including Sri L anka. In 1975 
reserves stood at US Dollars 57 million, which were sufficient to finance imports by 1.7 months. 
Reserves position of the country improved by 1976 to a level sufficient to cover 3 mo nths of 
imports with the receipt of IMF assistance and a reduction in imports through further restrictio ns. 
These reserves were mainly invested in US T-Bills, fixed deposits, call accounts and Sterling 
securities. 
In 1977, Sri Lanka unified its exchange rate with a currency depreciation and moved to a 
system of managed floating with a partial liberalisation of external trade and payments. In this 
environment during the post 1977 era, there has been a substantial expansion and diver sification 
in the country’s external transactions. Sri Lanka diversified the currency basket of the reserv es 
to include French Franc, Japanese Yen and Deutsche Mark. Further, it managed to increase its 
foreign reserves from US Dollars 278 million in 1977 to US Dollars 2,029 million by en d 1997, 
which was sufficient to finance 6.4 months of imports. Reserves management activities and 
techniques were expanded during this period deviating from traditional money market products 
into more meaningful portfolio management and trading strategies. 
PDFPAGE129
118
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
However, external reserves declined continuously from 1997 to reach US Dollars 1,049 
million by end 2000 largely owing to the escalation of war requiring higher expenditure on 
imports, higher petroleum prices and slowing down in export earnings. In this enviro nment the 
country completed the liberalisation of exchange rate arrangements by introducing a system of 
independently floating exchange rate on 23rd January 2001, allowing commercial banks to freely 
determine the exchange rate. Reserves position gradually began to improve since then along with 
the recovery from negative GDP growth in 2001. Reserves reached US Dollars 3,500 million in 
2007 and the Bank commenced assessing alternative investment opportunities such as repurchase 
and bond lending programmes to enhance return while maintaining liquidity and safety of reserves. 
With the emergence of sub-prime concern, the Bank moved its reserves as a prudential measure 
to more safe institutions such as reputed central banks. However, reserves declined sharply to 
US Dollars 1,300 million by early 2009 as foreign investors in sovereign securities withdrew  
their investments due to their own liquidity concerns at the peak of global financial crisis and 
the Bank sought alternative measures to augment reserves including SWAP arrangements with 
friendly nations. However with the ending of war and Stand-By Arrangement (SBA) facility with  
IMF, reserves improved sharply and by October 2010 it stood at an unprecedented level of US 
Dollars 7 billion. At present reserves are managed by a team of experts in multi currency and 
multi product environment targeting to achieve a higher rate of return.
Current Reserves Management Framework
Reserves management functions had been initially vested with the former Banking Department, 
which was one of the key departments of the Bank since its inception. After reallocating the 
functions of the Banking Department into four separate new departments in 2002, reserves 
management function was assigned to the International Operations Department (IOD). The 
required internal arrangements such as segregation of duties by creating a Front Office and Middle 
Office and enhancing technical and academic skills of the employees have been met over the time 
to match with the international standards required in reserves management. Front Office is the 
place where the transactions in foreign currencies take place and is often called as the ‘Dealing 
Room’. Middle Office performs the key function of risk monitoring and acts as an indep endent 
unit, which evaluates and analyses the risk faced by the Front office. Back Office functions are 
required to effect and settle the transactions originated by the Front Office. This involves the 
maintenance of foreign currency accounts and sending payment instructions among others. A t 
present, Back Office functions are carried out by the Payments and Settlement Department, which 
was also a section of the former Banking Department. In addition, policy recommendations 
relating to reserves management are made by the Foreign Reserves Management Committee 
(FRMC) at its monthly meetings and implemented with the approval of the Monetary Board. 
The FRMC is chaired by the Assistant Governor in-charge of the price stability cluster, and 
is comprised of Director of Economic Research, Director of International Operations, Chief 
Accountant as members and Director of Management Audit as an observer. It provides guidance 
for reserves management activities while reviewing the progress at its regular meetings. 
PDFPAGE130
119
Managing Sri Lanka’ s Foreign Reserves
Reserves management activity is a commercial activity whether it is carried out by a central 
bank or any other entity. Sri Lanka similar to many other countries in the region did  not pursue 
active reserves management policies until mid 1980’s. Reserves management activities were 
limited mainly to placing money market deposits as it was considered adequate since our reserve 
requirements were limited and the markets were not complex at that time. Service providers were 
limited and the knowledge pool was scant and communication was confined to cable messages. 
The CBSL used to send cable messages to the Bank of England and the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York in its early days requesting to make payments in other currencies or to place money  
market deposits since there were no market quotes available. Until the acknowledgment is 
received, there was no confirmation on the exchange rate or the deposit rate applied. In 19 77, in 
addition to Sterling Pound, US Dollars, Indian Rupee, Japanese Yen, Deutsch Mark and French  
Franc were used for market transactions in Sri Lanka. Activities in the foreign exchange markets 
gradually picked up along with the technical developments such as Reuters market information 
screens and development of Asian financial centres such as Tokyo, Hong Kong and Singapore.  
With these developments, CBSL commenced investing a part of its reserves in fixed income 
securities more methodically in early 1980s to enhance the return of the portfolio. These activities 
have now been further expanded to a number of government and non-govern ment investments 
including US, UK, Japan, Europe, Australia and New Zealand governments with active diversified 
portfolio strategies.
Growth of Reserves
In Sri Lanka, the pace of increasing reserves was not quite prominent until 2009. From there 
onwards, the reserves picked up at an accelerated rate with the end of the conflict leading to an 
enhanced investor confidence, resulting in a favourable outlook on the country. Prio r to 1977, 
particularly since early 1960s, the country managed with a limited value of reserves supported 
by a set of stringent controls and regulations. With the liberalisation of the economy, co upled 
with the introduction of a managed floating exchange rate regime in 1977, the need to maintain  a 
comfortable level of reserves was widely felt especially to minimise the excessive fluctuations of 
the exchange rate. Thereafter, the level of reserves gradually increased, until it dropped to  a bare 
minimum due to economic and political uncertainties experienced in the 1988-89 period. Since 
mid 2009, with the enhanced political and economic stability of Sri Lanka, foreign exchange 
reserves have grown significantly. 
Chart 11.1 shows the movements of foreign exchange reserves of the country beginn ing 
from 1948. 
The reserves, which stood at US Dollars 1.4 billion in May 2009, increased gradually to 
US Dollars 5.3 billion at end November 2009. This momentum in the reserves continued in th e 
second half of 2010, reaching a healthy position of US Dollars 7 billion in early Octob er 2010. 
The current level of reserves indicates the ability of the country to maintain an import cover of 
6.2 months. 
PDFPAGE131
120
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
Chart 11.1
Sri Lanka’s Foreign Reserves from 1948 - 2010
Chart 11.2
Sri Lanka’s Import Cover from 1948 - 2010   
Source: Annual Report (2010), CBSL 
Source: Annual Report (2010), CBSL 
-
1,000
2,000
3,000
4,000
5,000
6,000
7,000
8,000
1948
1952
1956
1960
1964
1968
1972
1976
1980
1984
1988
1992
1997
2001
2006
2010
Year
USD mn
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
1950
1953
1956
1959
1962
1965
1968
1971
1974
1977
1980
1983
1986
1989
1992
1995
1998
2001
2004
2007
2010
Year
No of Months
PDFPAGE132
121
Managing Sri Lanka’ s Foreign Reserves
Management of Gold Reserves
Investments in Gold reserves were not prominent until CBSL received a quantum of gold from  
IMF in 1977-78 at the rate of US Dollars 35 per troy ounce. During 1980s an d 1990s gold 
reserves had been accumulated through trading and investments in the gold market. Gold reserves 
have been extremely useful as a safe haven asset for the country when it faced crisis situations 
especially in 1988-89 where CBSL had obtained much sought US Dollars by exchanging gold  
holdings with the agreement to take them back (on a SWAP arrangement) proving its multi facet 
usage. The CBSL has entered into a more diversified portfolio management with the increased 
emphasis on gold holdings by purchasing ten metric tons of gold from IMF in Nov ember 2009. 
The active management of gold holdings by CBSL and trading opportunities had created a 
renewed hope of a good income stream. In order to safeguard physical gold holdin gs, CBSL 
maintains its gold reserves at the custody of the Bank of England, London. Chart 11.3 exhibits the 
movements of gold reserves since 1978. 
Reserves Management Strategy
In line with the enhanced reserves position, new investment opportunities will be looked into 
in search of higher returns. Accordingly, investments will be further expanded to hig h yielding 
securities, bond lending activities and repurchase market strategies in international bond markets. 
Chart 11.3
Gold Reserves from 1978 - 2010
Source: International Financial Statistics, IMF and Economic Research Department, CBSL 
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
1978
1980
1982
1984
1986
1988
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
2010
Year
USD mn 
PDFPAGE133
122
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
With the current boom in emerging market economies particularly in Asia, Latin America 
and the Eastern European region, the worldwide investors speculate a higher demand for emerging 
market sovereigns as well as corporate bonds. Therefore, Sri Lanka intends to move into th ese 
markets with the aim of diversifying its fixed income securities further.
Risk Management in Reserves Management
Sound risk management is an essential element in effective reserves management. Risk  
management functions aimed at ensuring sound governance based on best international practices 
that have been adopted by CBSL to promote the safety, liquidity and return objectives. Goo d 
governance framework of the Bank identifies and assesses the risks of reserves management 
operations and it allows the management of risks within the acceptable parameters and levels. 
Risk exposure of the bank is monitored continuously to determine whether exposures have been 
extended beyond acceptable limits. Over the past 60 years, these practices have evolved and at 
present, Middle Office, which is the risk management division of IOD, uses a number of indicators 
to measure and mitigate the risk involved. These indicators primarily include Duration, Convexity 
and Stress Testing to measure the interest rate sensitivity. The risks relating to deployment of 
reserves, namely, market risk, credit risk, operational risk and liquidity risk are detailed below:
Market Risk
Market risk comprises currency risk and interest rate risk
(a) Interest rate risk: The key aspect of the management of interest rate risk for CBSL 
is to protect the value of the investments from the adverse impact of interest rate 
movements. The interest rate sensitivity of CBSL portfolio is measured and managed 
in terms of duration. The emphasis is to keep the duration or the interest rate sensitivity 
of the portfolio within a manageable level. Interest rate exposure is further managed 
by placing restrictions on the tenor of investments.
(b) Currency risk: Currency risk arises due to the uncertainty in exchange rate fluctuation s. 
The CBSL foreign currency reserves are invested in multi currency, multi market 
portfolios to minimise the risk arising from exchange rate movements. Currency 
movements are managed against the approved benchmark composition, which may be 
revised from time to time by the management.
Credit Risk
Credit risk refers to risk arising out of defaults or delays in payment obligations. This is mitigated 
by assigning trading limits for counterparties or the trading partners of CBSL, which inclu des 
central banks, large and sound commercial banks and investment houses. Counterparty Credit 
PDFPAGE134
123
Managing Sri Lanka’ s Foreign Reserves
Risk Management System (CCRMS), which is a unique system developed by CBSL facilitates a 
comprehensive evaluation of the counterparties using financial indicators, ratings and products. 
Total exposure to all the counterparties are maintained within the assigned levels with the aim of 
minimising risk exposure and to enhance product availability to suit the investment requirements 
of CBSL.
Operational Risk
Operational risk is addressed through segregation of duties and placing required internal controls 
and processes. Internally there is a total separation of the front and back office functions in CBSL 
reserves management activities, overseeing of activities, dual controls and business continuity 
plan. Treasury Dealing Room Management System (TDRMS), which facilitates the trading, 
processing of transactions and recording also ensures several checks at the stages of deal capture, 
deal processing and authorisation. The authorising powers are delegated to officers at various 
levels of hierarchy to ensure the integrity.
The middle office is responsible for risk measurement and monitoring, performance 
evaluation and concurrent audit. However, CBSL intends to move towards an advanced and a 
sophisticated internal control system in view of the expansion of reserves.
Liquidity Risk
Liquidity risk arises due to the inability to sell an instrument at short notice and without incurring 
a significant cost. This risk has been addressed by maintaining adequate reserves in liquid money 
market and capital market instruments. The CBSL has invested a significant component of its 
reserves in liquid and highly rated assets, which could be converted into cash at short notice.  
Challenges Faced in Managing Reserves
The main challenge in managing the reserves in its early days of 1950s was the rapid 
accumulation of reserves and resulting liquidity surplus. However, this situation soon changed 
with foreign exchange outflows and the country moved into a more exchange controlled r egime 
with limited foreign reserves. Investment instruments were limited to money market deposits and 
selected securities, which were kept until their respective maturities during 1950-1977. Currency 
diversification was confined to Sterling, Gold and US Dollars, which were considered as low risk 
assets.
The country faced a severe shortage of foreign exchange in 1989 in the midst of political 
uncertainty of the country. CBSL had to convert its gold holdings into US Dollars thro ugh a 
swap arrangement in order to meet its foreign currency commitments. During this period gold 
reserves were held at the Federal Reserve Bank New York, and for the purpose of this swap 
transaction gold was dispatched to Mase Wespac Australia. Later when CBSL received Gold with 
PDFPAGE135
124
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
the unwinding of the swap, the Bank of England was chosen as the custodian for gold  in early 
1990s’. Subsequently in late 1990s’ and early 2000, the market value of the inv ested funds of 
the reserves was at much lower levels and funding for oil requirements was a severe burden. 
However, with prudent portfolio management activities and techniques, CBSL was able to meet 
the import demand while generating a reasonable income at that time.
The recent international financial crisis did not significantly affect the reserves portfolio of 
the country due to timely actions taken and the adoption of prudent risk management techn iques. 
The exposure to Lehman Brothers, which was the first turn down in the 2008 recession, was 
mitigated due to the timely withdrawal of investments. Further when the sub prime crisis emerged, 
CBSL was not affected, as it had no exposure towards those markets or instruments. 
The euro crisis, which started in the latter part of 2009 with the highest budget deficit of  
Greece, did not make a significant impact on CBSL exposure to the European region due to th e 
timely risk mitigating actions effected on the investments in volatile markets. Since the sovereign 
debt crisis in the euro area is continuing CBSL is closely monitoring the investments in the region 
to further mitigate the risk.
Managing a high volume of reserves has become a challenge since it is required to 
maintain liquidity and safety of investments with a reasonable rate of return in a low interest rate 
environment globally.
Conclusion
Reserve management techniques and risk management have changed rapidly over the past 
60 years along with the advancement of technology and knowledge. Primitive money market 
investment strategies have converted into more complex and advanced instruments in search of 
a higher return from reserves. The CBSL in its endeavour to meet the challenges of managing  
its reserves in complex financial markets has embarked on a modernisation programme where 
state of the art technology of electronic records, analysing, monitoring and reporting of reserve 
management activities will be introduced to enhance the return of the reserve portfolio. Further,  it 
is intended to move into a broad array of asset classes, further expansion of geographical coverage 
of markets and extension of dealing hours to cover the global financial markets in differen t time 
zones. However, challenges still lie ahead since it is required to maintain the safety and liquidity 
of investments without hampering the country’s reputation while attempting to earn a higher rate 
of return on the reserves in order to maintain and preserve the  value of reserves.
PDFPAGE136
125
Economic liberalisation is largely accompanied by reduced government intervention and ensuring 
greater private sector participation in the overall economic activity. The liberalisation attempts 
pursued by the country have brought about a mixed performance in economic transition. When 
other Asian economies, which were on par with Sri Lanka at the time of independence, secured 
very rapid growth, Sri Lanka was able to achieve middle income status only after about 60 
years since independence. The prevalence of factors such as variations in balance of payments, 
government’s commitment to social welfare programmes, democratic political system, political 
strengths of successive governments and some structural deviations in the international market 
prevented Sri Lanka from establishing its standing among the emerging economies. In the context 
of the theme, this article reviews circumstances under which the country changed its liberalisation 
policy from time to time since independence. 
At the time of independence, Sri Lanka was largely an agricultural economy with full 
currency convertibility in all transactions with a fixed exchange rate system and also with 
relatively more favourable socio-economic conditions compared to most other Asian countries. 
The country was quite liberal and the private sector could engage in economic activity quite 
freely. However, certain factors that were to make macroeconomic management subsequently 
more difficult were already built into the socio-economic system, leading to a change in the 
Changing Lanes - Pursuing a Liberalised 
Economic Policy
C.A. Abeysinghe
Deputy Director, Economic Research Department
12
PDFPAGE137
126
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
path of economic policies. Among such factors were expansionary fiscal policies including the 
provision of free health and education, subsidised food, the presence of vast income disparities, 
democratic political system and neglected domestic agriculture. 
At this time, a greater part of the population lived in rural areas and depended on  
agriculture. The agricultural sector was segmented into two: widely as an advanced modern 
plantation sector producing three major export crops; tea, rubber and coconut, and a backward 
traditional sector producing mainly subsistence crops, which provided livelihood for a larger part 
of the population. A relatively high per capita income compared to most other Asian countries 
with a large subsistence rural population itself shows the income disparity that persisted at the 
time.
In the early period of independence, foreign trade played a dominant role in the economy 
making the country one of the most open economies in Asia. Foreign trade accounted for about 
70 per cent of the GDP with a share of nearly half a per cent of the total trade in the world market. 
The country relied predominantly on primary plantation products for its export earnings while 
increasingly depending on imports for its basic food requirements. The postwar developments in 
the international sphere also called for a more liberal economic environment with free trade marked 
by full currency convertibility. International trade was greatly hampered by unfair economic 
competition led by high tariff, trade barriers and competitive devaluation. Therefore, developed 
nations accepted the necessity of maintaining a stable international monetary environment backed 
by fixed exchange rates. As a result, the Bretton Woods Conference led to the establishment of a 
monetary arrangement based on a system of fixed exchange rates anchored by the convertibility 
of the US dollar into all other currencies. Accordingly, the value of the Sri Lankan rupee stood at 
around Rs. 4.77 per US dollar under the fixed exchange rate introduced under the Bretton Woods 
System. Subsequently, the economic agenda of the successive governments was determined by 
the need for maintaining the fixed exchange rate regime while dealing with the developments in 
the balance of payments (BOP). 
The economic structure driven by the three commercial crops did not provide a satisfactory 
framework for the sustainable development of the economy. The rural masses, who had limited 
access to basic needs of nutrition, education, shelter, medical care, sanitation, etc., were unable 
to enjoy the economic benefits generated by plantation crops exports. The highly organised  
plantation sector was complemented by the economic mechanism orchestrated by the colonial 
administration dominating the activities in the services sector such as trade, commerce, banking, 
insurance and transport. 
The thrust of the government’s economic development initiatives was aimed at ensuring 
an equitable welfare distribution among all segments of the economy and attaining sustainable 
economic growth. Therefore, the government was committed to strengthening social welfare 
measures through direct intervention in the economy. In the meantime, to reach out to the masses, 
PDFPAGE138
127
Changing Lanes - Pursuing a Liberalised Economic Policy
domestic agriculture sector, particularly paddy, was given the first priority by the governmen t. In 
the midst of high expenditure on food imports, particularly rice, the overriding objective of the 
government’s development policy was centred on achieving self-sufficiency in rice. 
The country was able to maintain the liberal policy regime in the early period supported 
by two commodity booms. External trade, the main driver of the economy, raised the country’s 
foreign reserves. It also increased government revenue through taxes on both exports and imports 
and facilitated the continuation of the welfare programme. However, fluctuations in the prices of 
agricultural commodities in the world market, while causing a sharp decline in external reserves, 
induced a change of lanes of economic policies towards the end of the decade. Highly vulnerable 
exports and steady demand for imports tended to impact the BOP resulting in a rapid drying up of 
foreign reserves while excessive expenditures on welfare measures brought about a heavy burden 
on the government budget. 
In addition to large scale public expenditure on welfare, initiatives were taken for industrial 
sector development through government intervention. Controls on foreign exchange tr ansactions 
and foreign trade as well as the nationalisation efforts were also given the highest priority in 
government intervention in the economy. Growing BOP difficulties led to the introduction of  
further restrictions such as tightening foreign exchange controls by establishing the Foreign 
Exchange Budget Committee, import licensing, imposition of cash margins on the opening of 
letters of credit, trade controls with higher import duties and ceilings on advances for importing 
certain types of goods and restrictions on hire purchase finance. Greater emphasis was placed 
on import substitution industries by providing incentives and protections. In the context of 
international experience too, particularly in East Asian countries, import substitution has emerged 
as one of the development strategies available in a fixed exchange rate regime. Subsequently, 
although Sri Lanka could not reap the due results, East Asian countries were able to transform 
their economies into export led industrialisation once they got into export promotion. Some major 
services were nationalised in order to service a large segment of the population. During this period 
of time, nationalisation and an expansionary public sector were not new to the region. India also 
followed a heavily centralised economic model with the nationalisation of heavy industries such 
as steel, shipping, aviation, mining, etc., while receiving a large inflow of foreign aid, main ly in 
the form of official development assistance. 
By mid 1960s, the economy was highly regulated with protectionist measures in response 
to a deteriorating BOP position, largely an outcome of expansionary policies with fixed exchan ge 
rates. In order to arrest the continued decline in foreign reserves, export promotion strategies 
were implemented in mid sixties within a framework of import substitution. Export promotion 
strategies were aimed at the diversification of exports while import substitution was aimed at 
reducing expenditure on imports. Also, there was an attempt towards partial liberalisation. To 
promote minor export crops, a Bonus V oucher Scheme was introduced in 1966. The rupee was 
devalued by 14 per cent in 1967. To diversify exports by promoting non -traditional exports 
PDFPAGE139
128
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
and to discourage non essential imports, a dual exchange rate system was introduced in 1968 
under the Foreign Exchange Entitlement Certificate (FEEC) mechanism. In order to boost minor 
exports sector, such exporters were granted a share of their export earnings in foreign currency 
by introducing a convertible rupee account. However, as a whole, the external position weakened 
considerably during 1960s despite external assistance from institutions such as the International 
Monetary Fund (IMF) in the form of stand-by arrangements and compensatory finan cing for 
export commodity price fluctuations.
 The deterioration in external reserves continued. The food crisis began in 1971 and  an 
unprecedented oil price hike in 1973 worsened the situation, creating severe problems for the 
government in its economic management. Exchange control measures were further tightened to 
preserve foreign exchange. New state enterprises were established and the existing ones were 
strengthened, ensuring greater state involvement in market activities. The Co-operative movement 
including Co-operative Wholesale Establishment (CWE), Salu Sala, Building Materials 
Corporation, State Trading Corporation, Paddy Marketing Board, Ceylon Fisheries Corpo ration, 
etc., were assigned a greater role in the management of internal trade. Amidst severe shortages 
during the economic crisis, price controls and drastic rationing were introduced to ensure fair 
distribution. 
In the international front too, certain economic developments began to surface despite 
regulated capital movements under the fixed exchange rate regime. Structural deficiencies in the 
US economy, stemming from the oil crisis, the Vietnam War, accelerated inflation, huge trade 
deficit and draw down of reserves threatened international monetary management, which was 
primarily held by the fixed exchange rate system. With growing difficulties, the continuation 
of the US commitment to the fixed exchange rate system and its obligation to convert dollars 
into gold on demand, became extremely difficult despite the devaluation of the dollar on sever al 
occasions. Eventually the convertibility was withdrawn in 1971 and the Bretton Woods system o f 
exchange rates collapsed in 1973. Changing value of the rupee in relation to the US dollar  with 
the collapse of the Bretton Woods system and growing BOP difficulties compelled the Sri Lankan 
government to further tighten exchange controls. During this period, transactions relating to both 
exports and imports as well as other foreign exchange payments required the permission of the 
Controller of Exchange. These highly restrictive exchange controls for both current and capital 
transactions prevailed until 1977. 
The year 1977 marked a turning point in economic policies of Sri Lanka with the 
introduction of far reaching liberalisation measures. Sri Lanka was the first country in the 
South Asian region to liberalise substantially like this. The inward looking restrictive policies, 
which constrained economic activities, were reversed by implementing policies geared towards 
liberalising the economy with greater private sector participation in production and investment. 
The remarkable success of some Asian economies, which transformed themselves into emerging 
markets and reached developed country status through export-oriented economic policies, 
PDFPAGE140
129
Changing Lanes - Pursuing a Liberalised Economic Policy
provided the basis for this change. The market oriented economic structure was adopted in two 
main fronts: the external sector was strengthened by promoting trade and investment through a 
series of liberalisation measures, while direct state involvement in economic activities was phased 
out to improve quality, productivity and competitiveness. 
The dual exchange rate system was replaced by a managed float allowing the exchange 
rate to be determined largely on the basis of market conditions and a series of exchange control 
relaxation measures was implemented, displaying a major shift from the restrictive policies. 
The removal of restrictions on current international transactions, the elimination of quantitative 
restrictions on imports, the provision of wider authority to commercial banks to deal with foreign 
exchange, the enhancement of exchange entitlements for travel, business and medical treatment, 
the promotion share market investment, the removal of price controls and licensing requirements, 
and the facilitation of foreign employment and worker remittances were among the relaxation 
measures.  
Similarly, among the measures introduced to reduce the fiscal burden arisen from an 
expanded public sector included restructuring food subsidies, rationalising and simplifiying o f 
the tariff structure to reduce state intervention, privatising government enterprises, and promoting 
private sector led growth in place of import substitution. The degree of tariff protection offered 
to import substitution industries were gradually scaled down. Export industries were encouraged 
through the adoption of incentives to encourage foreign direct investments (FDI) and th e 
establishment of export processing zones with attractive tax incentives, unlimited access to 
foreign currency credit, better infrastructure, minimum government intervention, etc. By 1994, 
all restrictions on current account transactions were removed and Sri Lanka accepted obligations 
under Article VIII of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement. 
 Foreign capital inflows, which were almost non-existent during the pre-1977 period except 
for some foreign loans to the government, increased gradually. Capital account transactions 
increased initially with the implementation of the privatisation programmes, backed by early 
liberalisation efforts and thereafter, in line with economic development, inducing a significant 
volume of private foreign capital flows in addition to official flows. Except for a few strategic 
areas, foreign exchange restrictions were removed, thereby permitting greater inflow of foreig n 
capital. Accordingly, free movement of inward foreign investment in shares and inward FDI 
except for a few restricted areas, were allowed and the repatriation and the surrender requirement 
for export proceeds were abolished, enabling exporters to retain these proceeds abroad, if they 
wished to do so. Meanwhile, commercial banks were permitted to borrow up to 15 per cent of their 
capital reserves from abroad and the private sector was allowed to make overseas investments 
with permission being on a case by case basis.
External trade liberalisation was further strengthened with the expansion of  
bilateral, regional and multilateral trade agreements. Sri Lanka remained firmly committed  
to the multilateral trading system, being a founder member of the World Trade  
PDFPAGE141
130
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
Organisation (WTO). Sri Lanka has also made commitments under General Agreement on Trade 
in Services (GATS) on telecommunication, tourism, and financial services. Initiatives have 
already been taken to broaden the services and investment sector liberalisation through existing 
trade agreements. 
International experience shows that a liberalisation process complemented with right 
policies would result in rapid economic growth. However, the liberalisation attempts pursued in 
Sri Lanka have not yielded the expected results due to a number of factors. During the period 
since independence up to 1977, the democratic political process changed the governments a few 
times, imposing different political ideological approaches in terms of liberalisation. However, the 
development approach during this period mainly centred on promoting domestic agriculture with 
rising public expenditure on maintaining social welfare measures. At a time, one administration 
pursued a relatively liberal approach favourable to the private sector, but following a political 
change the other pursued an inward looking approach with nationalisation and an expanded 
government creating uncertainty in the minds of investors. As a result, when the East Asian 
countries attracted a large quantum of FDI and moved away from import substitution industry to 
an export led industrialisation, Sri Lanka continued to struggle with import substitution framework 
without much needed FDIs. 
Alternatively, in the post-1977 era, although the successive governments demonstrated their 
commitment to liberalisation policies, Sri Lanka could not achieve the expected rapid growth 
experienced in the emerging market economies owing to certain other factors. In particular, there 
had not been strong investor confidence in the economy due to the three decade long ethnic 
conflict, intermittent civil insurrections, persistent macroeconomic imbalances and reluctance of 
the governments to pursue some necessary adjustments on account of political pressures. 
However, under the present administrative regime, which came into power in 2005, there 
have been vast developments which are conducive for prosperity.  The end of the war changed 
the underlying economic preferences of the country in numerous fronts. It effectively altered the 
socio-economic structure of the country and continued to follow the liberalisation path, further 
strengthening the other complimentary factors to achieve a more meaningful liberalisation.  It 
does not follow a privatisation programme, but restructured loss making state entities with Public-
Private Partnership arrangements while facilitating the participation of the private sector across 
all economic sectors. The government revitalised some state institutions such as CWE, Paddy 
Marketing Board, Transport Board, etc. to operate parallel to the private sector, establishing 
relevant benchmarks to shield consumers from unfair competition. Unlike the pre 1977 regim e, 
the government took over the management of SriLankan Air, Sri Lanka Telecom and Shell 
Gas, which were under the private sector, in a transparent manner without creating negative 
perceptions within the investor community. The ethnic conflict which hovered in the investors’ 
mind for nearly three decades was completely eradicated. The macroeconomic environment was 
strengthened with a stable exchange rate, higher growth rates, lower and predictable inflation, 
PDFPAGE142
131
Changing Lanes - Pursuing a Liberalised Economic Policy
lower interest rates, higher level of foreign reserves, etc. Some effective policy decisions such 
as implementation of Norochcholai Coal Power Plant, the Upper Kotmale Hydro Power Project, 
removal of the fuel subsidy and tax reforms, continuation of fertiliser subsidy which were not 
characterised earlier due to political risk, were implemented reflecting political boldness and 
confidence. Implementation of mega infrastructure projects such as power projects (Uma Oya, 
Moragahakanda), road development (Southern Highway, Colombo Outer Circular, Colombo-
Katunayake Airport Expressway), port development (Colombo South Harbour, Hambantota Por t 
Development), aviation (Mattala International Airport, Katunayake Expansion), sports complexes 
(International Sports Stadium in Diyagama, International Cricket Stadiums in Suriyawewa, 
Pallekele) and many other projects fulfilled the long-felt needs of the country and also laid th e 
foundation for subsequent investments. 
Capitalising the excellence in macroeconomic, political and social spheres, Sri Lanka 
penetrated the international capital market for required funds to finance various infrastructure 
projects. Successful completion of sovereign bond issues became truly a hallmark achievement 
in establishing Sri Lanka’s presence in international capital market. It effectively established the 
benchmark for the corporate sector to raise debt capital from foreign sources.
In addition, the comparatively controversial segment of the liberalisation process, the 
capital account liberalisation was also further strengthened during this period exploiting the sound 
macroeconomic stability, efficient financial system and political stability. Accordingly, among 
other things, investments by foreigners in Rupee denominated debentures and unit trusts, foreign 
borrowings by companies and students, opening of places of business in Sri Lanka by foreign 
companies, opening of foreign currency accounts by foreigners on tour or business, payments to 
non-residents in respect of purchase of real estate properties in Sri Lanka and engage in money 
changing business by selected super markets were permitted. With the further liberalisation of 
the capital account, which is considered the logical conclusion to the liberalisation process, is 
expected to attract a steady and continuous flow of FDIs which were remote in the past. 
A retrospective review into the liberalisation attempts in the past and the host of strengths 
rooted in the current socio-economic structure show the true resurgence of the decade-long 
liberalisation attempts. Against this background, the country is now in a better position to take a 
decisive leap while making up for opportunities missed in the last few decades. 
References
Central Bank of Sri Lanka. 40th Anniversary Commemorative V olume. Colombo: Central Bank of Sri Lanka, 1990.
---. Annual Report, Various Issues.
---. Economic Progress of Independent Sri Lanka. Colombo: Central Bank of Sri Lanka, 1998.
Karunathilake, H.N.S. Fifty Years of Central Banking in Sri Lanka 1950-2000. Colombo: Centre for Demographic and 
Socio Economic Studies, 2000.
Lakshman, Weligamage D., and Clement A. Tisdell. Sri Lanka’s Development since Independence: Socio-Economic 
Perspectives and Analyses. New York: Nova Science Publishers, 2000.
PDFPAGE143
132
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
PDFPAGE144
133
Introduction
Sri Lanka’s central location in the Indian Ocean, straddling trade routes from the East to the West, 
made it a popular trading hub in ancient times, where spices, gems and elephants were exchanged 
for fabrics, metals and other goods. Even today, over 200 vessels navigate along this path daily, 
as the government tries to reclaim Sri Lanka’s hub status in the Indian Ocean, amidst a shift 
in the center of economic gravity from the West to the East, as India and China show signs of  
re-emerging as major propellers of global economic growth. 
Sri Lanka’s external trade relations during the last 6 decades have changed considerably. 
In general, it is a story about embracing an outward-oriented trade regime, in order to expand 
overseas market access for its products and services at the bilateral, regional and multilateral 
fronts, interspersed with brief periods when it looked inwards. The outward looking policies 
encompassed an inclination for the use of price based measures such as tariffs rather than 
quantitative measures and preference for private enterprise over public enterprise. The reduced 
intervention in trade allowed the country to allocate resources in line with its comparative 
advantages which in turn enabled Sri Lanka to prosper. Those policies that looked inwards 
comprised preference for quantity based measures rather than tariffs, excessive government 
intervention in economic activities, ranging from stringent import controls to heavy protection 
of domestic industries, which shrunk Sri Lanka’s share in world trade, particularly since East 
Sri Lanka’s External Trade Relations
Mrs. M.K. Jayawardena
Senior Economist, Economic Research Department
13
PDFPAGE145
134
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
Asian countries began to dominate world trade due to the liberalisation of their trade regimes 
starting in the mid-1960s. Given its small size, Sri Lanka was also vulnerable to fluctuations in 
the international commodity markets. It was also susceptible to a range of internal and external 
shocks during the last 6 decades, which helped shape Sri Lanka’s trade structure to what it is 
today. 
Trade at the time of Independence
Sri Lanka was an open economy at the time of regaining independence in 1948, but with a tariff 
based preference to products of the British Empire. Having inherited a well-organised plantation 
economy from the British raj, Sri Lanka continued to rely heavily on exports of tea, rubber 
and coconuts and imports of rice, sugar, fertiliser and investment goods. Aided by fertile land, 
supportive infrastructure and foreign entrepreneurship, the plantation sector performed well 
and the agricultural commodities accounted for 90 per cent of total exports. The main export 
destinations were the United Kingdom (UK), India and the United States of America (USA), all 
of which had made significant investments in support of the plantation sector, including energy , 
transport, banking and insurance services. Manufacturing turned out to be unattractive given its 
small domestic market and the increased competition in potential export markets from established 
suppliers elsewhere. (Rajapatirana, 1988) Incentivised by a system of tariff preference for 
products of the British Empire, the UK and India were the primary source of Sri Lanka’s imports. 
The trade account registered a surplus for eight consecutive years after independence, led by high 
rubber prices during the Korean War (1950-52) and high tea prices triggered by a shortfall of tea 
in the international market during 1954-55. 
Move towards the Socialist Bloc
In an effort to diversify trade with the rest of the world, Sri Lanka entered into an agreement 
with China in 1952 to exchange rubber for rice. This was followed by a series of trade and 
payments agreements with a range of other countries amidst concerns about over-specialisation 
and over-dependence on the traditional exports. 1 Politics also appeared to play a role here, since 
the Government at the time wanted to develop close relations with the Soviet Bloc. However, 
Sri Lanka lost valuable ground for two reasons. First, some countries exchanged their industrial 
products for tea and then sold the tea to other countries which in turn, re-sold it to yet other 
countries, thereby depriving Sri Lanka direct foreign exchange earning opportunities. Second, the 
industrial goods Sri Lanka imported under the payment agreements were reported to be not up 
to the standards of similar products imported from the West. Nevertheless, Sri Lanka remained 
committed to the neutral trade regime until 1957, when it displayed a tendency towards the use of 
1 Trade and payment agreements entered into with the Union of Soviet Socialist Republic (USSR), Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, 
Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Poland, Romania, Yugoslavia and Spain between 1956 and 1960 lapsed in 1977.
PDFPAGE146
135
Sri Lanka’ s External Trade Relations during the Last 60 Years
import duties as “a tool of promoting import substitution by way of imposing protective tariffs for 
some infant industries and raw materials.” (Athukorala, 1980) Thus began Sri Lanka’s first b out 
of import substituting industrialisation policy.2 Nevertheless, GDP growth averaged 5 per cent per 
annum during the period from 1948 to 1960, which has been attributed to the strong performance 
of the agricultural export sector. Export duties were a major source of government revenue during 
this time. 
Sri Lanka’s economy changed its course in the 1960s by adopting a restrictive trade regime 
in response to balance of payments difficulties, at a time when other countries such as Hong Kong, 
Singapore, South Korea and Taiwan, pursued liberal trade regimes to attain their development 
goals. In general, the tariff structure and quantitative restrictions adopted by Sri Lanka during this 
time tended to discriminate in favor of final goods and against intermediate goods. “By 1962,  all 
imports except foodstuffs, petroleum, fuel, fertilizer and pharmaceuticals were subject to licenses” 
(Rajapatirana, 1988). Tariff rates on imports ranged from 10 per cent to 500 per cent, based 
on the level of competition with domestic import substitutes. Agricultural goods, in particular, 
were affected by price controls and centralised distribution mechanisms. It has been surmised 
that it was Sri Lanka’s commitment to consumer welfare during this time, through government 
intervention in the health, education and food sectors, which prevented it from embarking on 
an outward oriented development approach (Rajapatirana, 1988). The Government’s decision to 
nationalise the oil companies led to a rift in Sri Lanka’s relations with the West, which however, 
improved temporarily from 1965-70 as the UK and the USA re-emerged as Sri Lanka’s major 
trading partner countries accounting for over 45 per cent of exports and more than 40 per cent of 
imports. 
Brief Attempt at Trade Liberalisation
An attempt at trade liberalisation was made in 1965 with the devaluation of the currency by 20 per 
cent, which followed British and Indian devaluations. A dual exchange rate system was adopted 
in 1968 to discourage the so called “non-essential” imports by charging a premium of Rs. 44 per 
Rs. 100 over the official exchange rate on the c.i.f. value. The premium was subsequently raised 
to Rs. 55 per Rs. 100 in July 1969. “Non-essential” imports were brought under an Open General 
Licenses system while “essential” imports were tax exempt. Some items such as liquor, tobacco 
and luxury vehicles were subjected to a tax of 300 per cent. The two tier exchange rate system 
that promoted non-traditional exports and implicitly taxed traditional exports distorted the prices 
of a larger proportion of exports. Thus, the benefits of trade liberalisation did n ot bear fruit as the 
balance of payments did not improve and the Sri Lankan economy slipped back to a rigid control 
system. 
2  Import substituting industrialisation policy included Government owned steel, tyre, hardware, sugar, salt, cotton yarn, brick and 
tile, chlorine and ilmenite factories, some of which were inaugurated during the Second World War to meet domestic shortages.
PDFPAGE147
136
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
Back to Controls amidst External Shocks 
Sri Lanka’s trade relations with the West oscillated in response to a series of shocks that rocked the 
economy in the 1970s. The first oil price shock in 1973 led to higher expenditur es on petroleum 
and fertilizer imports. The commodity price boom around the same time resulted in higher 
expenditures on rice, wheat and sugar imports, which were only partially offset by the earnings 
generated from higher export prices of tea, rubber and coconuts. However, ties with the West 
ebbed to the lowest levels in the 1970s with the nationalisation of the oil and plantation companies 
in 1971 and the government takeover of trading and agency houses in 1975. By then, China and 
Pakistan had emerged as the major buyers of Sri Lankan exports. Together, they accounted for 
about 20 per cent of export earnings. In the meantime, Iraq and other Middle Eastern countries 
were treading their way up as significant trading partners as importers of Ceylon tea. Saudi Arabia 
accounted for 12 per cent of total imports, followed by Japan, Australia, France and Thailand, 
which together accounted for about 30 per cent of total imports. 
The restrictive policies that followed were supported by an overvalued exchange rate, 
differential interest rates which favored domestic industries, state entry into commerce through 
selective nationalisation and various forms of interventions in the labor market. 3 However, these 
inward looking policies failed as government bureaucracy could not reap the desired pr ofits or 
maintain the expected standards. A general shortage of foreign exchange during this time led 
to foreign exchange budgeting to allocate limited resources on priority basis. As a result, there 
were frequent bouts of excess capacity in industry as capacity utilisation became dependent on 
the availability of foreign exchange required to import intermediate goods and raw materials 
(Rajapathirana, 1988). There was also a switch in imports from consumer goods to intermediate 
goods, giving rise to severe shortages of basic requirements such as food and medicine. These 
protectionist measures, which became increasingly complex over time, distorted prices which in 
turn impacted trade and investment, as a result of which, Sri Lanka’s exports suffered, as the 
economy stagnated.
Renewed Attempt at Trade Liberalisation 
The failure of the rigidly regulated economy, the hope of international support and the impressive 
performance of the Newly Industrialised Countries (NICs) since the mid 1960s provided the 
basis for a renewed attempt at trade liberalisation in 1977. Not only was it supported by a strong 
political and public commitment for reform but it was also supported by tangible benefits in 
terms of immediate availability of durable consumer goods made possible by large aid flows. 
The trade liberalisation package included placing bulk of import trade under general licensing, 
unifying the dual exchange rates, adopting a floating exchange rate regime, relaxing exchang e 
controls, removing many of the price controls, rationalising the tariff structure, encouraging 
3  Interventions in the Labour Market comprised of minimum wage laws, restric tions on firing and social security legislation. 
PDFPAGE148
137
Sri Lanka’ s External Trade Relations during the Last 60 Years
foreign investment and permitting the repatriation of profits. The removal of price contro ls and 
trade licensing were instrumental in resurrecting private sector participation in economic activity. 
The exchange rate became a key instrument that determined trade performance. These policies 
which helped generate a more competitive economic environment, sparked off the revival 
of the manufacturing sector led by the private sector, as operations of state monopolies were 
gradually scaled down. Industrial policy aimed at export oriented industrialisation and foreign 
investment was encouraged. The first Export Processing Zone (EPZ) was set up in Katunayake 
in 1978 and the Export Development Board was established in 1979 to support the promotion 
and development of exports. Trade relations with the west regained importance. With the rapid 
expansion in industrial activities and the diversification of the export structure, USA became the 
single largest buyer of Sri Lanka’s exports by 1979. Japan also became one of Sri Lanka’s major 
trading partners by 1979. 4 
Trade Liberalisation amidst Industrialisation
The 1980s were characterised by the second oil price hike, which led the international economy 
into recession. Nevertheless, the massive private and public capital inflows that accompanied 
trade liberalisation led the nominal exchange rate to appreciate, reflecting a phenomenon 
commonly referred to as the Dutch Disease. It also led to a considerable increase in imports of 
investment goods. However, the large public investments led to burgeoning budget deficits, which 
fuelled inflation. Together, they eroded Sri Lanka’s export competitiveness, achieved throug h 
trade liberalisation supported by generous tax concessions. Liberalising the trade regime while 
increasing public expenditures turned out to be inconsistent. Meanwhile, the adverse terms of trade 
reduced the volume of exports and affected Sri Lanka’s trade balance. However, the Government 
continued to encourage export orientation of industries by gradually eliminating export licensing 
requirements and export duties over the period 1988 - 1994 and ensuring free current account 
convertibility since 1994. It set up more EPZs, offered financial assistance and duty rebates to 
small and large scale exporters and developed capacity in an effort to diversify exports. It also 
encouraged “decentralisation” of garment factories that helped change the composition of Sri 
Lanka’s exports. Industrial exports accounted for 71 per cent of total exports by 2010, over half of 
which comprised of apparel exports. Trade liberalisation helped attract quota-hopping East Asian 
garment exporters to invest in Sri Lanka’s rudimentary garment industry, capturing incentives 
offered by export quotas, despite the lack of cloth and accessories manufacturing bases to 
facilitate backward integration (Kelegama, 2005). Notwithstanding the elimination of the textile 
quota system in 2001, the apparel industry grew rapidly, harnessing increasingly higher levels of 
value addition. Although the share of agricultural exports declined over the years to 27 per cent 
in 2010, earnings from tea exports, which accounted for 17 per cent of total exports, continued 
to play a dominant role in the economy as it acquired a reputation for its superior quality. With 
respect to imports, while the relative share of consumer and investment goods declined over the 
years, the share of intermediate goods imports increased, driven by petroleum. 
4  Japan remained Sri Lanka’s major trading partner from 1979-1995.
PDFPAGE149
138
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
External and Internal Shocks 
Shocks to the economy thereafter ranged from commodity price booms and busts, terrorism, natural 
disasters, and economic crises. Sri Lanka’s economy weathered prolonged droughts (el nino), 
the tsunami disaster, frequent flash flooding and a series of insurgencies, including 3 decades o f 
terrorism which heightened into war status, a number of times. The impact of the oil price increases 
during the Gulf crisis on the trade balance was off-set to some extent by the higher earnings from 
exports, particularly tea. 5 The impact of the Asian financial crisis on Sri Lanka’s economy was 
minimal, largely due to the lower trade exposure to the region, flexibility of currency and  the 
relatively closed capital and financial accounts compared to those of some East Asian economies. 
Trade with the rest of the world became expensive in 2001, in view of the higher premium charged 
on freight insurance, due to an increase in perceived risk brought about by the terrorist attack 
on the country’s only international airport. The setback caused by the September Attack on the 
USA also contributed towards the decline in trade in 2001. Later, the global economic recession 
triggered by the “Sub-prime” crisis had a significant impact on Sri Lanka’s external trade, as both, 
exports and imports dropped. This may be attributed to the increased exposure to the USA and the 
European Union (EU), which accounted for 22.2 per cent and 38.5 per cent of Sri Lanka’s exports, 
respectively, in 2009. Industrial exports in particular, were severely affected, as earnings declined 
by 13.8 per cent, year-on-year, reflecting contractions in all sub-sectors. However, these trends 
reversed quickly with the global economy gradually recovering in 2010, led by agricultural exports 
which fetched better prices in the international market. 
Trade in Services
Trade in services was in deficit at the time of independence owing to the significant foreign 
participation in the economy. Outflows comprised mainly those related to transport services on 
account of charges imposed by foreign shipping companies. In an effort to manage the foreign 
exchange outflows to contain the burgeoning balance of payments deficit arising from the sluggish 
export volumes and adverse terms of trade, services such as public transport, port and insurance 
were nationalized in the 1960s. The Ceylon Tourist Board was established in 1966 to reap higher 
earnings from travel. Exchange control regulations imposed in the 1970s included restrictions 
on outbound travel, which were subsequently relaxed in the 1980s. Earnings during this time 
comprised mainly of tourism and bunkering services, both of which performed well and helped 
generate a surplus in the services account of the balance of payments from 1973 to 1981. However, 
earnings from tourism remained subdued thereafter, due to various disturbances including ethnic 
strife. All remaining restrictions on payments and settlements pertaining to services were relaxed 
when current account transactions were made freely convertible in 1994. With the expansion in 
international trade in goods, the services sector also developed. More recently, transportation, 
information technology and travel services have become important sources of foreign exchange 
earnings. 
5 The period after liberalisation has been interspersed with tea booms (1979-82, 1983-84, 1990, 1996, 2008, 2010)
PDFPAGE150
139
Sri Lanka’ s External Trade Relations during the Last 60 Years
Trade Cooperation
Sri Lanka entered the multilateral level trade forum in 1948 as one of the 23 founding members 
of the General Agreement on Tariff and Trade (GATT). As trade in services and international 
investment expanded over the years, new issues arose which led to a series of multilateral trade 
negotiations that culminated in the Uruguay Round and set the stage for GATT to be replaced 
by the World Trade Organization (WTO) agreement in 1995, ratified by the bulk of  the world’s 
trading nations as the sole provider of legal ground-rules for international commerce. 
Although trade policy changed from time to time, since the trade liberalisation in 1977, 
successive governments have pursued market oriented trade policies and measures aimed 
at developing more balanced, global partnerships. In 1975, Sri Lanka entered into its first 
regional trade agreement, the Bangkok Agreement, (subsequently renamed as the Asia Pacific 
Trade Agreement (APTA) in 2005), which links Sri Lanka to China and South Korea among 
other countries in the Asia Pacific region. Meanwhile, Sri Lanka pursued the South Asian 
Preferential Trading Arrangement (SAPTA) in 1995 intended to promote preferential trade and 
the South Asian Free Trade Agreement (SAFTA) in 2006 to enhance economic integration in 
South Asia by fostering regional trade. Trade with India and Pakistan increased significantly 
with the implementation of the India-Sri Lanka Free Trade Agreement (ISLFTA) in March 2000 
and the Pakistan Sri Lanka Free Trade Agreement (PSLFTA) in June 2005. A Comprehensive 
Economic Partnership Agreement (CEPA) with India, which is in the process of being negotiated, 
aims at further economic integration by incorporating trade in services and investment and 
accommodating the movement of people.
Sri Lanka benefited from tariff concessions offered under the Generalised System of 
Preferences (GSP) schemes of the EU and the USA since 1971 and 1976, respectively. Access to 
the Special Incentive Arrangement (GSP+) concessions from the EU since 2005 helped expand 
market share in the EU as it surpassed the USA as Sri Lanka’s prime export destination by 2006. 
This facility which was withdrawn in 2009, helped develop Sri Lanka’s exports considerably. 6 
Taken separately, however, the USA and the UK, remained the foremost export destinations, 
while imports were dominated by India, Singapore, China and Iran. 7 
Conclusion  
Sri Lanka, being a small economy, was strongly susceptible to external shocks. It was also 
subjected to a range of internal shocks over the last six decades. External trade remained an 
important instrument that promoted economic growth as the country alternated between inward 
and outward orientation. The periods of stringent controls reduced heavy dependence of the 
6    Apart from apparel, the GSP+ Arrangement helped foster the growth in exports of fisheries products, ornamental fish, fruits and 
vegetables, ceramic products, bicycle components, rubber products, etc. 
7   Imports from India and Singapore comprised mainly of refined petroleum  products while Iran was the main supplier of crude oil.  
The major import from China was cotton. 
PDFPAGE151
140
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
economy on external trade.  However, state commitment to large scale consumer welfare programs 
reduced the availability of resources to support commerce. Interventions in the economy may 
have been costly and counterproductive, as they misallocated resources from their optimum uses. 
Interventions have also been time consuming to turn around, perhaps depriving the country of 
opportunities to stride forward. The trade structure also changed over the years. The post 1977 
liberalisation efforts, in particular, marked greater dependence on intermediate goods and reduced 
the importance of finished goods imports. The direction of trade also swung between the E ast and 
the West. Despite these vacillations, Sri Lanka remained resilient amidst the numerous internal 
and external shocks. Although, trade with the West exceeds that with Asia by far, more recently, 
trade with Asia has taken on an increasing trend. Perhaps, the pendulum is beginning to swing 
again, as Sri Lanka seeks to diversify external trade, in terms of goods as well as markets, to 
become a trading hub of the Indian Ocean. 
References
Athukorala, Premachandra. “Import Substitution, Structural Transformation, and Import Dependence - a Case Study of 
Sri Lanka.” 9   Conference of the Economic Society of Australia and New Zealand. Brisbane, 1980.
Athukorala, Premachandra, and Sisira Jayasuriya. Macroeconomic Policies, Crises, and Growth in Sri Lanka, 1969−90. 
Washington, D.C.: The World Bank, 1994.
Central Bank of Sri Lanka. Annual Report, Various Issues.
---. Economic Progress of Independent Sri Lanka. Colombo: Central Bank of Sri Lanka, 1998.
Kelegama, Saman. “Ready-Made Garment Industry in Sri Lanka: Preparing to Face the Global Challenges.” Asia Pacific 
Trade and Investment Review 1.1 (2005): 51-67.
Rajapatirana, Sarath. Foreign Trade and Economic Development: Sri Lanka’s Experience. Washington D.C.: The World 
Bank, 1988.
th
PDFPAGE152
141
By virtue of location, Sri Lanka being in the middle of an extensive network of interconnected 
trade routes, the country has inherited a long history of international linkages. As such, Sri 
Lanka’s integration with the world economy is hardly a new phenomenon. Yet, the recent decades 
have experienced some remarkable changes in economic integration across the globe. According 
to a prominent economist, “[t]he pace of global economic change in recent decades has been 
breathtaking indeed, and the full implication of these developments for all aspects of our lives 
will not be known for many years” (Ben Bernanke, 2006). 1 Undoubtedly, the world economy 
has moved towards closer integration during the recent decades. International trade flows have 
increased substantially, financial markets in developed and emerging economies have become 
increasingly integrated, significant parts of the world economy that were relatively insulated 
until recently, opened up to free trade and capital flows, and continental European countr ies 
adopted a single currency. In light of these global economic changes, a worthwhile question to 
raise would be how Sri Lanka’s integration with the global economy has evolved over time. This 
article reviews the last sixty years of integration of the Sri Lankan economy with the world, 
in light of obvious expansions of international trade, labour, and financial flows. For  example,  
Dr. P.K.G. Harischandra
Senior Economist, Economic Research Department
Expanding Horizons – 
Integration with the World Economy
The author wishes to thank Dr. D. S. Wijesinghe and Dr. Koshy Mathai for helpful comments and suggestions; and  
Ms. K. K. Subasinghe for compilation of data series obtained from various Annual Reports of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka.
1 Bernanke, B.S. (2006):“Global Economic Integration: What’s New and Wha t’s Not New?” Annual Economic Symposium, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Kansas.
14
PDFPAGE153
142
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
Sri Lanka’s merchandise imports have more than doubled during the recent decades relative to the 
gross domestic product (GDP), i.e., from 17.1 per cent in 1970 to 36.1 per cent by 2008 2 ; while 
merchandise exports have risen from 14.8 per cent of GDP in 1970 to 20.8 per cent by 2008, less 
impressive though. Overall, merchandise trade, including both exports and imports, has increased 
dramatically over the same period, i.e., from 31.9 per cent of GDP in 1970 to 56.9 per cent by 
2008. Further, trade in services as a percentage of GDP has also doubled, and stood at 10 per cent 
in 2007, compared to 4.2 per cent in 1970. Meanwhile, Sri Lanka has experienced a dramatic 
increase in remittances over the years, which has brought about significant macroeconomic 
consequences for the economy. For example, during 2009, private inflows amounted to US dollars 
2.9 billion (which is about 6.9 per cent of GDP), while during 1970, total remittances were just 
about US dollars 107 million. Moreover, Sri Lankan economy has seen increased participation 
of international business establishments over time. As of 2010, eleven foreign banks are in 
operation in Sri Lanka, while several leading multinational companies continue to expand their 
businesses, and this trend is expected to continue to a larger extent, owing to greater liberalisation 
of economic policy being introduced on a regular basis. Moreover, Sri Lanka’s bond portfolios 
have become more international, attracting more foreign investor confidence on the post-war 
economy. Sri Lanka’s ability to benefit from the remarkable developments in information and 
communication technology and the payments and settlements system facilitated enhancing the 
economic integration. 
In general, economic integration refers to a process of removing cross-border discriminations 
which may affect the flow of goods and services, and the movement of factors of production. Thus, 
arguably, a country can benefit a lot through increased participation in the world economy . Such 
benefits may include efficient allocation of resources due to changing production patterns, gaining 
international standards of efficiency through domestic competition, access to larger markets, and 
the ability to participate in international capital markets in the event of country-specific shocks, 
and more importantly, the exposure to new ideas, technologies and products. 3 However, one 
should not lose focus on some negative aspects attached to greater economic integration, which 
may mainly include the possibility that the infant or less effective industries may find it hard to 
withstand open market competition and be forced to exit the market, consequently. Nonetheless, 
in a rapidly changing economic environment in which national borders and regional differences 
are becoming less and less relevant, increased economic integration may seem to be inevitable, 
the challenge remaining for any country, especially, a small open economy like ours, would be to 
making use of economic integration as a means of achieving accelerated economic growth. 
2 Of course, the last couple of years mark a decline in imports due to the impact of adverse macroeconomic consequences (see, for 
example, the IMF’s World Economic Outlook, Oct 2010). 
3 See the report by Nepal Rastra Bank (2005):“The Process of Economic Integ ration is South Asia”, International Finance Division, 
Research Department.
PDFPAGE154
143
Expanding Horizons – Integration with the World Economy
 Chart 14.1
Some Indicators on the Integration with Global Economy
 
Notes:
1. Merchandise trade is the sum of merchandise exports and imports divided by the value of GDP, all in U.S. dollars.
2. Trade in services is the sum of services exports and imports divided by the value of GDP, all in U.S. dollars.
3. Foreign direct investment is the sum of equity capital, reinvestment of earnings, and other short- and long-term 
capital, as shown in the balance of payments. This series shows the sum of net inflows and outflows and is divided 
by the value of GDP. 
4. Gross private capital flows are the sum of the absolute values of direct investment inflows and outflows recorded 
in the balance of payments financial account, excluding portfolio investment, and other changes in the assets and 
liabilities of monetary authorities and general government. The indicator is calculated as a ratio to GDP in U.S. 
dollars. 
5. Private Transfers are the sum of the absolute values of direct inflows and outflows recorded in the balance of 
payments financial account.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
1959
1961
1963
1965
1967
1969
1971
1973
1975
1977
1979
1981
1983
1985
1987
1989
1991
1993
1995
1997
1999
2001
2003
2005
2007
2009
Per cent
Chart 14.1.a
Merchandise Trade (as % of GDP)
Chart 14.1.b
Trade in Services (as % of GDP)
Chart 14.1.e
Government Long-term Investment (as % of GDP)
Chart 14.1.f
Total Private Transfers (as % of GDP)
Chart 14.1.c
Foreign Direct Investment (as % of GDP)
Chart 14.1.d
Private Long-term Investment (as % of GDP)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
1959
1961
1963
1965
1967
1969
1971
1973
1975
1977
1979
1981
1983
1985
1987
1989
1991
1993
1995
1997
1999
2001
2003
2005
2007
2009
Per cent
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
1959
1961
1963
1965
1967
1969
1971
1973
1975
1977
1979
1981
1983
1985
1987
1989
1991
1993
1995
1997
1999
2001
2003
2005
2007
2009
Per cent
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
1959
1961
1963
1965
1967
1969
1971
1973
1975
1977
1979
1981
1983
1985
1987
1989
1991
1993
1995
1997
1999
2001
2003
2005
2007
2009
Per cent
2
4
6
8
10
12
1959
1961
1963
1965
1967
1969
1971
1973
1975
1977
1979
1981
1983
1985
1987
1989
1991
1993
1995
1997
1999
2001
2003
2005
2007
2009
Per cent
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
1959
1961
1963
1965
1967
1969
1971
1973
1975
1977
1979
1981
1983
1985
1987
1989
1991
1993
1995
1997
1999
2001
2003
2005
2007
2009
Per cent
PDFPAGE155
144
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
Sri Lanka’s economic integration with global economy has met with some drastic changes 
over time, mainly because of changes in the development policy framework adopted by successive 
governments from time to time. These policies range from inward-looking import substitution 
industrialisation to outward-looking export oriented industrialisation, although they are no t 
mutually exclusive. Accordingly, the extent to which Sri Lankan economy has been involved in 
the world economy has changed significantly. For example, Chart 14.1 shows some indicators o n 
Sri Lanka’s integration with global economy over the period from 1959 to 2009. 4 A noticeable 
feature is that most of the indicators show a significant upward shift around 1977, durin g which 
economic liberalisation policies were introduced in Sri Lanka by relaxing strict exchange and 
import control measures and moving away from inward-looking policies with a greater emphasis 
on import substitution industries. As shown in Chart 14.1.a merchandise trade jumped to ov er 
77 per cent (as a share of GDP) by 1980, from just over 30 per cent in 197 6. Similarly, Chart 
14.1.b shows that trade in services increased to about 16 per cent (as a share of GDP) by 1980 
from about 4 per cent in 1976. However, mobilising of foreign resources, in terms of foreign 
direct investments has not been subject to dramatic changes (see Chart 14.1.c). This may be due 
to various reasons, such as, existence of some stringent capital controls during that time, the 
time taken to build up the market sentiment etc. However, private and government long term 
investments showed some substantial improvement (see Charts 14.1.d and e). Also, total private 
transfers have increased markedly since 1977 (see Chart 14.1.f). Given this significant policy 
change that occurred in 1977, it would be useful to look at Sri Lanka’s economic integration with 
the world economy in two sub-periods, i.e., pre-1977 and post-1977 period s, as described below.
Pre-1977 Period
The first decade following independence (1948-1959), in which the Central Bank of Sr i Lanka 
was established 5, marked some significant steps towards promoting economic activities, other 
than merely focusing on the plantation crops sector, which had been given prominence under 
the colonial administration. These activities included several development programmes aimed at 
developing transportation, power, health, education etc., as well as irrigation and land development 
programmes. However, during 1960s, Sri Lanka had to confront with several economic problems, 
particularly, on the external front. For example, the balance of payments deteriorated, mainly 
due to faster growth of imports over exports (Charts 14.1.a and b depict a declinin g trend of 
both merchandise trade and trade in services, during late-1950s and 1960s). Consequen tly, the 
promotion of export trade was considered essential, and more importantly, perhaps, import 
restrictions were viewed as the most appropriate measure at the time. However, by late 1960s, 
adverse impact of the quantitative restrictions became more apparent, import substitution policy 
deemed to be less effective, and orientation towards economic liberalisation and the greater 
4 The data sample begins from 1959 due to data availability.
5 The Central Bank was established by the Monetary Law Act No.58 of 19 49 and commenced operations in August 1950, thus  
ending the Currency Board System which was set up under the Paper Currency Ordinance No.32 of 1884. The Bank was called the 
Central Bank of Ceylon until it was renamed as the Central Bank of Sri Lanka in  December 1985.
PDFPAGE156
145
Expanding Horizons – Integration with the World Economy
reliance of private sector development were viewed as appropriate. In order to overcome the 
economic hardships, a significant inflow of capital and intermediate goods was necessary. Since 
export earnings were not adequate to meet this demand, mobilisation of foreign aid was considered 
to be inevitable. By late 1960s, on the recommendation of the Central Bank, several policy 
measures were introduced to promote exports, including devaluation of exchange rate by 20 per 
cent in 1967, introduction of dual exchange rate under Foreign Exchange Entitlement Certificate 
(FEEC) scheme, which provided a depreciated exchange rate system for non-traditional exports 
and non-essential imports. Further, in 1972, the Convertible Rupee Account (CRA) Scheme was 
introduced to boost the minor export sector by granting exporters a share of export earnings in 
foreign currency.6 
Post-1977 Period
According to the Central Bank Annual Report (1995), “Sri Lanka had a highly distorted tr ade 
policy regime prior to 1977, consistent with the inward-oriented development strategy followed at 
that time. Both tariff and non-tariff barriers were extensively used to control imports, for balance 
of payment reasons, as well as to protect domestic activities and industrial enterprises, which 
were mostly state run, against import competition” (p.108). It was realised by 1977 that restrictive 
policies adopted during the earlier period constrained economic activity, resulting in a shortfall 
in both import substitution and export oriented production sectors. Economic activity was f urther 
hampered due to limited imports of intermediate and investment goods, and overall, the level 
of saving and investment has remained low prior to 1977. Subsequently, a policy package was 
prepared to liberalise and simplify exchange and trade system, with the view to allowing price 
mechanisms to determine economic activities and to eliminate the adverse effects of import and 
exchange controls (see Table 14.1 for a summary of the key financial reforms and capital acco unt 
liberalisation measures implemented since 1977). To this end, the involvement of the Central Bank 
has been significant. For example, the introduction of managed floating exchange rate system in 
1977 by abandoning the dual exchange rate system, helped to maintain export competiveness. 
Further, rationalisation of the tariff structure by establishing the Tariff Review Committee and 
a Presidential Tariff Commission helped improving the efficiency of the price mechanism and 
reducing distortions. Also, the Central Bank played a key role in mobilising financial resources 
from both domestic and foreign sources, in order to match the investment requirements that the 
country was in great need at the time. Implementation of several monetary and fiscal policy 
measures helped promoting private investments. These included interest rate reforms, extending 
credit facilities to the private sector, development of the share market, and in particular, allowing 
internationally reputed foreign banks to open branches, and introducing off-sho re banking since 
1979 with a view to attracting foreign investors and promote the export sector. Among the 
measures adopted by Sri Lanka in recent years in relation to expanding economic integration, the 
participation in regional economic co-operation is one of the most significant.
6 See for more details, 40th Anniversary Commemorative V olume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka 1950-1990.
PDFPAGE157
146
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
Table 14.1
Financial Reforms and Capital Account Liberalisation
Date Major Changes
1977 Delegation of authority to commercial banks with regard to selected current account transactions. 
Enhanced exchange entitlements for travel, business, medical treatment, edu cation, and 
emigration.
1978 Inward FDI and portfolio investments were freely permitted, subject to ex isting regulations. 
Exchange allowance for business travel and education increased. Commercial ban ks permitted 
to open NRFC accounts for Sri Lankans and foreign nationals. Procedure simplified and more 
exchange control functions delegated to commercial banks. 
1980 Introduction of Resident Non-National Foreign Currency Accounts (RNNFC) Scheme.
1981 Commercial Banks permitted to encash inward remittances and travellers’ chequ es and foreign 
currency notes up to US$ 500 without obtaining details on source or purpose of receipt. 
1986 Exchange entitlements for education abroad further enhanced. Requirement to obtain exchange 
control approval for encashment of traveller’s checques exceeding Rs.100,000 per day withdrawn.
1990 Permission granted to approved country funds, regional funds, and n on-resident individuals to 
invest in shares in listed companies up to 40 per cent of issued share capital. With this, a scheme 
of Share Investment External Rupee Accounts (SIERA) introduced through au thorised dealers to 
facilitate and monitor such investments.
1991 Exporters permitted to borrow from Foreign Currency Banking Units (FC BUs) for financing 
imports of inputs to execute export orders.
1992 Permission granted to approved country funds, regional funds, non-res ident individuals, and 
corporate bodies incorporated outside Sri Lanka to invest in shares in listed companies up to 
100 per cent of issued share capital, subject to exclusions, limitations and conditions set out by 
Controller of Exchange.
1993 Repatriation and surrender requirements in respect of export proceeds abolished . Export proceeds 
permitted to be retained in foreign currency accounts either in Sri Lanka or abroad.
1994 All remaining restrictions on current international transactions removed. Sri Lanka accepts 
obligations under the Article VIII of IMF Charter.
2006 Further opening up the capital account has been suggested, as being a means to facilitate economic 
growth further through promoting higher investment by minimising cost of equity capital and debt 
and improving the efficiency of the financial system. Thus, measures have been taken to liberalise 
the capital account further, including, the granting permission to foreign country funds, regional 
funds and the mutual funds, approved by the Securities and Exchange Commission in Sri Lanka, 
corporate bodies incorporated outside Sri Lanka and citizens of foreign countries to purchase and 
hold up to 5 per cent of the total outstanding value of Rupee Denominated Treasury bonds, at any 
given point of time.
PDFPAGE158
147
Expanding Horizons – Integration with the World Economy
2009 Permission was given to hold and sell rupee account named “Treasury bonds/bills Investment 
Extern al Rupee Account–Deshabhimani (TIERA-D)” provided that all such investments in 
aggregate do not exceed 10 per cent of the total value of T-bonds/ T-bills outstanding at any given 
point in time.
2010 Recently, the Central Bank of Sri Lanka announced some arrangements made in  relaxing foreign 
exchange regulations relating to investment abroad by Sri Lankans, foreign borrowings by 
resident companies and investments by non-residents in the domesti c market. Some of these key 
measures include permitting foreigners to invest in Rupee Denominated Debentures issued by 
local companies, permission to foreigners on tour or business in Sri Lanka to open accounts in 
foreign currency, permission to open Foreign Currency Accounts for Gem and  Jewellery Industry 
etc.
2011 Further relaxations were announced such as permission to Sri Lankan resid ent individuals, 
corporate and unincorporated bodies to invest in equity of overseas companies (effective from 
1 January, 2011,) and permission to Sri Lankan resident individu als, permission to insurance 
companies to invest a part of their assets abroad. In addition to the relaxations introduced in 
2010, more relaxations were introduced with effect from January 1, 2011,  which include granting 
permission to any person resident in Sri Lanka or any company or partnership registered in Sri 
Lanka to acquire, hold, and transfer shares of companies incorporated outside Sri Lanka and the 
sovereign bonds issued by foreign governments and governmental organisations subject to the 
directions specified by the Government. Particularly, the following l imitations will operate of 
any permission granted to the above: (a) in respect of a company listed at the Colombo Stock 
Exchange, US dollars 500,000 or an equivalent amount in any desi gnated foreign currency per 
annum; (b) in respect of a company which is not listed at the Colombo Stock Exchange, US dollars 
100,000 or an equivalent amount in any designated foreign currency per annum; (c) in respect of a 
partnership registered in Sri Lanka, US dollars 100,000 or an equivalent amount in any designated 
foreign currency per annum; and (d) in respect of any individual resident in Sri Lanka, US dollars 
100,000 or an equivalent amount in any designated foreign currency per annum.
Regional Integration
During recent decades, the world has seen global trends towards open regionalism which refers 
to a gradual movement towards continent-based integration. For example, North American Free 
Trade Agreement (NAFTA), the European Union (EU), Association of South East Asian Nations 
(ASEAN), Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC), are to name a few. Further, Sri Lanka has 
played a key role in moving towards regional integration in the South Asian region, for example, 
the formation of South Asian Association of Regional Cooperation (SAARC), participation in the 
South Asian Preferential Trading Arrangement (SAPTA), which came in to effect in 1995, and 
in the treaty regime on the South Asian Free Trade Area (SAFTA) in 2001 are some noteworthy 
Source: Central Bank of Sri Lanka- Annual Reports
PDFPAGE159
148
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
developments. However, in order to make maximum use of the full potential in the region, an 
integrated development strategy for South Asia may need to be formulated, while overcoming 
some inherent contradictions and territorial disputes among the member countries. It is worthwhile 
to mention two key bilateral trade agreements that Sri Lanka has been involved with. First, the 
India-Sri Lanka Free Trade Agreement (ISFTA), which was signed in 1998 and implemented tariff 
concessions from 2000, resulted in removing tariffs on some goods immediately, while partial 
concessions are granted on selected goods. Second, the Pakistan-Sri Lanka Free Trade Agreement 
(PSLFTA) which was signed in 2002, and became operational from 2005, under which Sr i Lanka 
has been able to enjoy duty free market access on 206 products in the Pakistani market, while 
Pakistan, in return, has gained duty free access on 102 products in the Sri Lankan market. Also, 
with a view to strengthening the trade links further in the region, Sri Lanka is in the process of 
negotiating Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreements (CEPA) with India and Pakistan. 
While the increased economic integration may deliver its intended results, the conventional 
wisdom, however, suggests that increased trade linkages would lead to the effects of negative 
demand shocks to spillover intensely across international markets. 
Economic Integration and Spillover Effects
During the recent global economic downturn, many advanced economies experienced some 
spillover effects due to the sharp slowdown of the housing sector of the United States and the 
subsequent turmoil that erupted in the international financial markets. For example, as reported 
in recent IMF World Economic Outlook (Oct 2010) the collapse of the world trade du ring the 
last year was sudden, severe, and synchronised, and accordingly referred to as “the great trade 
collapse”. Further, the Report describes that “[f]or economies that rely heavily on external demand 
for their growth, [their] findings highlight the urgency of reorienting gro wth by strengthening 
domestic demand” (p.125), even if countries like ours may still need to look for ways and 
means to boost export earnings through appropriate measures. Subsequently, a different theme 
has emerged in international macroeconomics, namely “decoupling” which refers to “apparent 
divergences in economic performance among different regions of the world economy” (Kohn, 
2008).7 These divergences mainly relate to the perception that the business cycles of the United 
States and other advanced economies are becoming less synchronised (arguably though, given 
the way in which the recent financial crisis did spread across the globe); and also to the fact that 
economic growth in emerging market economies is fairly sustainable relative to the substantially 
slower growth in the advanced economies. 
Where does the Sri Lankan economy stand in this context, given that it is a small open 
economy? So far, this article has described how Sri Lanka has been expanding its economic 
integration with the world economy, throughout the last sixty years or so. As such, one would 
reasonably expect a greater impact on the economy of the turmoil in the global financial markets 
7 Khon D.L. (2008): “Global Economic Integration and Decoupling”, International Research Forum on Monetary Policy, Frankfurt, 
Germany.
PDFPAGE160
149
Expanding Horizons – Integration with the World Economy
and subsequent decline in economic activity. However, Sri Lankan economy has been able to 
hold up its trend economic growth relatively successfully, despite the magnitude and severity 
of the recent economic meltdown. Simultaneously, the economy had to confront with another 
wave of negative shocks due to the escalation of counter-terrorism efforts, which broug ht about 
direct and indirect adverse effects, such as deterioration of tourism industry, risk premium on 
the financial market in the context of substantially downgraded sovereign ratings of the countr y, 
and overall deterioration of terms of trade etc. In explaining how Sri Lanka could be able to 
do so, the findings of a recent study by Artis et al. (2010) may be useful. 8 This study examines 
the behavior of the international business cycle across 25 advanced, emerging, and developing 
economies (including Sri Lanka) for a period of 125 years. The importance of international 
sources of fluctuations, either common shocks or spillovers, is measured relative to the share 
of the forecast error variance attributed to domestic shocks. Thus, a small domestic share 
corresponds to a relatively larger role for international rather than domestic disturbances. In this 
context, the finding relating to developing country block (to which Sri Lanka is a part of) is rather 
interesting, because it suggests that country-specific shocks still play a dominant role in business 
cycle dynamics, relative to international shocks. 9 For example, at longer horizons, international 
sources of fluctuations typically account for only about 40 per cent of business cycle v ariance, 
while country-specific shocks account for 60 per cent of business cycle variance during post-1973 
period. Note, however, that this evidence may need to be evaluated carefully, because, it applies 
to the developing country-block in general, and not solely to Sri Lanka. As such,  drawing firm 
conclusions on any signs of decoupling of individual countries may require further studies. 
Concluding Remarks
Sri Lanka’s economic integration with the world economy has met with some significant changes 
over time, i.e., from a lower degree of integration into a higher degree of integration. Over the 
last sixty years, Sri Lanka has made significant improvements in uplifting the living standards of 
its citizens, and in that, increased economic integration may have played a significant role. Note, 
however, that disagreements still exist on whether or not global integration benefits developing 
countries to alleviate poverty to a greater extent. Yet, as a rapidly emerging economy in the South 
Asian region, Sri Lanka has a lot to improve in order to catch up with the pace of development 
that some emerging market economies in the East and South East Asian region experienced over 
the recent decades. In this context, it seems worthwhile noting some observations made on the Sri 
Lankan economy in the very first annual report of the Central Bank in 1950, (p. 13). 
8 Artis, M., Chouliarakis, G., and Harischandra, PKG. (2011): “Business Cycle  Synchronisation Since 1880”, The Manchester 
School, V ol. 79(2) pp.173-207.
9 The key finding of Artis et al. (2011) is that there is compelling evidenc e in favour of a secular increase in international business 
cycle synchronisation within a group of European and a group of English -speaking economies that started off during 1950-
1973 and accelerated since 1973. Further, since the 1960s, the g radual trade integration within a group of European countries 
diminished the relative significance of idiosyncratic (or country-specific) shocks, and resulting in the formation of the European 
Monetary Union. However, this observed secular rise in business cycle synchronisation in advanced economies does not extend to 
the emerging market and developing economies.
PDFPAGE161
150
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
“The achievement of a rapid increase in production in Ceylon is, of course, the 
core of the economic problem. It is most disconcerting, for example, to find that even o n 
the crest of the present boom there is still some unemployment and a very considerable 
amount of underemployment. Such a situation should not be, for economic conditions 
could scarcely be more favourable for using labour to expand production than they are 
today. Purchasing power is more than adequate; demand is brisk. Money capital, labour, 
and land are available. The answer lies partly at least in adequacy of enterprise. Or, if the 
enterprise is present, the ways and means of linking it with money capital are absent. It is 
common knowledge that many of those with money are using their resources to increase 
their holdings of existing estates or what is worse, to speculate, rather than to replant, 
to open up new land, or to start new enterprises. Such activity contributes little to the 
country’s development.” 
Of course, the macroeconomic structure of the Sri Lankan economy at present, may be 
distinctly different to what it was in 1950, yet it seems that some of the inherent characteristics 
are still apparent in the economy today. So, the Sri Lankan economy has to implement some 
structural changes, in the areas of mobilising and utilising of resources in a much more productive 
way that incentivises aggregate saving and investment in the economy. This may not be achieved 
through openness per se, but we may need to enhance our capacity to adapt to changes in the 
outside world. In this respect, Sri Lanka may need to re-examine the effectiveness of policy 
measures adopted in a range of important areas over the course of its post-independence histo ry. 
One such more obvious area is the development of human capital, through an education policy 
based on research and development, which may deliver professionals and skilled manpower to be 
matched with the needs of the world economy in the 21 st Century. 
PDFPAGE162
151
The stock of public debt is the total sum outstanding in respect of liabilities incurred by the 
government over successive years to finance its budgetary operations when government 
expenditure typically exceeds its total revenue. The Central Bank of Sri Lanka, in its capacity as 
the agent of the government, is vested with the responsibility of the management of the public 
debt, in terms of Section 113 of the Monetary Law Act (MLA). For this purpose, th e Public Debt 
Department (PDD) was set up in 1950 when the Central Bank commenced its operations. 
 The key objectives of public debt management are to (i) manage the public debt to ensure 
that the government’s financial needs are met at the lowest possible cost, consistent with a prudent 
degree of risk; (ii) service government debt on time with 100 per cent accuracy preserving  the 
default free nature of government debt; and (iii) broaden and deepen the governmen t securities 
market. Within the context of these three objectives, operations of public debt management cover 
the issuance of government securities including international sovereign bonds, making maturity 
and interest payments, recording of ownership of securities, maintenance of the debt databases, 
assessment and management of the risks associated with the debt portfolio, appointing and 
supervision of primary dealers, development of the domestic government securities market and 
activities related to obtaining the sovereign rating of the country. 
In managing the public debt, the PDD maintains a close coordination with the activities 
of the Ministry of Finance, particularly with th e Treasury Operations, External Resources and 
Fiscal Policy Departments, in a strong institutional framework where the Ministry is responsible 
Managing the Public Debt
Chandra Wijayasekera
Additional Superintendent, Public Debt Department 
(Currently on release to the Ministry of Finance and Planning)
15
PDFPAGE163
152
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
for mobilisation and management of external concessionary funds, coordination with donor s, 
maintenance of external debt database, treasury cashflow management, provision of funds for 
debt service and providing advice on borrowings and borrowing limits.
All borrowings for the government are made under the authority granted under section  
2(1) (b) of the Appropriation Act in respect of the financial year and such borro wings should 
not exceed the amount specified in that section. As a part of public debt management, an annual 
borrowing programme is formulated at the beginning of each year, taking into account a number 
of considerations such as the maturity structure, currency distribution, domestic and foreign 
debt composition of the existing portfolio and estimated resource availability of the economy 
for that year. This annual programme is operationalised through monthly borrowing programmes 
formulated by the Domestic Debt Management Committee (DDMC), which is represented by 
Superintendent of Public Debt, Directors of Economic Research, Statistics, and Domestic 
Operations of the Central Bank and Director General of Treasury Operations of the Ministry o f 
Finance, at its monthly meetings.  
During the past 60 years, Sri Lanka’s total public debt stock has shown a steep  
increase with debt to GDP ratio recording an increase from 17 per cent in 1950 to 82 per cent 
in 2010. Public debt can be divided into two components, domestic debt and foreign d ebt.  
After 1977, the government’s dependence on borrowings from foreign sources in creased rapidly, 
driving the foreign debt to GDP ratio to remain above 30 per cent, compared to the average 
foreign debt to GDP ratio of 10 per cent during the period, 1950-1976.  However, this foreign 
debt was largely received as development assistance in the form of project and commodity aid 
from bilateral and multilateral sources on highly concessional terms. During the past 60 years, 
the Central Bank has taken several initiatives to improve the management of public debt, both 
domestic and foreign. 
Domestic Debt
The government raises funds from domestic sources mainly by issuing Treasury bills and 
Treasury bonds. In addition, Rupee securities/loans have been issued to the domestic market to 
raise medium and long term funds since 1937, from time to time. All those debt instruments are 
Sri Lanka Rupee (LKR) denominated securities with fixed interest rates. At the initial stage, funds 
required for the government were raised through issuing Treasury bills for which an active market 
did not exist and almost the entire stock was absorbed by the Central Bank. 
Treasury Bills
Treasury bills have been the main instrument for raising short term funds for meeting budgetary 
expenditure. The Treasury bills are issued under the provisions of the Local Treasury Bills 
Ordinance and the maximum limit on the issue of Treasury bills is fixed by the Parliament, 
under the authority of resolutions of Parliament passed under Section 2(1) of the Ord inance. This 
PDFPAGE164
153
Managing the Public Debt
ceiling, which was Rs. 25 million in 1948, has been raised from time to time to adequately meet 
funding requirements of the government, and at present it stands at Rs. 850,000 million, reflecting 
the enhanced need for short term funds in absolute terms.  
The Central Bank was first authorised to issue Treasury bills in 1953. However, there was 
no active primary or secondary market for Treasury bills in the 1950s to 1970s an d about 98 per 
cent of the bill issuance was held by the Central Bank. Central Bank is authorised by Section 112  
of MLA to subscribe to any unsubscribed amount of Treasury bills issues. With the in troduction 
of measures to liberalise the economy, together with the liberalisation of interest rates allowing 
them to be determined through market forces, Central Bank initiated measures to develop the 
Treasury bills market in 1980, both to improve debt management and monetary management of  
the country. 
Accordingly, a secondary market for Treasury bills was introduced in 1981 by open ing 
discount and rediscount windows for Treasury bills by the Central Bank and the Central Bank  
commenced selling Treasury bills in 1981 to divest its holdings. As rediscounting window was 
available to raise cash, if required, investors became quite willing to hold Treasury bills in their 
portfolios. As a result, the Central Bank holdings in total Treasury bills outstanding were gradually 
brought down to 16 per cent in 1996 from 93 per cent in 1985. The practice thereafter has been 
for the Central Bank to hold Treasury bills largely to the extent it is required for the Bank to 
conduct monetary policy. 
In 1986, weekly primary auctions for the sale of Treasury bills commenced to reissue the 
maturing Treasury bills, taking into consideration the funding requirement of the government and 
to keep the market active by ensuring an undisrupted flow of Treasury bills to meet investor  
demand. Furthermore, in 1981 the Bank commenced issuing Treasury bills of relatively long er 
maturities of 182 days and 364 days to better manage funding requirements and suit inv estor 
appetite. This process improved the attractiveness of Treasury bills among all investor groups, 
including the non-bank private sector.  
The weekly auctioning process of Treasury bills was automated in 1998, enabling primary 
dealers to submit their bids online. These developments made yield rates of Treasury bills 
benchmark market interest rates in the domestic financial market. The share of Treasury bill 
holdings in the total domestic debt portfolio was 20 per cent at end 2010, compared with 6 per 
cent in 1948.
Treasury Bonds 
In 1997, Treasury bonds were introduced to the market under the provisions o f the Registered 
Stock and Securities Ordinance (RSSO) as a market based instrument to raise funds to meet 
medium to long term financial needs of the government. The Treasury bonds issued to the mark et 
PDFPAGE165
154
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
from 1997/1998 were of maturities of 2, 3 and 4 years. In the subsequent year s, 5 and 6 year 
maturities were also issued to the market, providing investors with a range of instruments to 
manage their portfolios. However, until 2002 the Treasury bonds with longer term matur ities did 
not have significant demand from investors. In 2003, the Central Bank issued Treasury bonds with 
maturities of 10, 13, 15 and 20 years, further extending the yield curve of government securities 
as a means of reducing the rollover risk, and to provide the market with a benchmark f or pricing 
long-term debt securities. However, in the recent past only the Treasury bonds with maturities up  
to 6 years received a significant investor demand. As of end 2010, outstanding Treasury  bonds 
totalled to 64 per cent of the domestic debt portfolio, primarily consisting of bonds with maturities 
up to 10 years, making Treasury bonds an important debt instrument in mobilising lon g term 
funds from domestic sources. The Treasury bond market is expected to remain the main domestic 
funding source for the government in future too. 
In 2006, the Central Bank issued index-linked Treasury bonds of 3 and 4 year  maturities 
with coupon rates for the years after the first year based on average annual inflation rate du ring 
the immediate previous six months plus a margin of one per cent. 
Rupee Securities/ loans
Rupee securities/loans are the oldest instrument used to raise funds for the government. Being 
a medium and long term non-tradable debt instrument, ownership of Rupee securities/loans 
has been almost entirely with the public sector institutions and public statutory funds. With the 
introduction of more attractive other tradable debt instruments like Treasury bills and Treasury 
bonds, the share of Rupee securities/loans in the domestic debt portfolio decreased rapidly in the 
recent past to a level of less than 5 per cent, compared to a peak level of 96 per cent in 1949. 
Rupee securities/loans are now issued mainly to meet the requirement of long term institutional 
investors at a pre-determined rate. In contrast to the Treasury bills and Treasury bonds,  Rupee 
securities/loans are still issued in scrip form.
Sri Lanka Development Bonds (SLDBs) 
In view of the diminishing opportunities for obtaining funds from international do nor agencies 
due to competition from other developing countries coupled with difficulties in raising add itional 
funds from domestic Rupee markets without causing an excessive pressure on domestic interest 
rates, the government introduced Sri Lanka Development Bonds (SLDBs) in 2001 to raise f unds 
in foreign currency terms, mainly aiming funds held in Non-Resident Foreign Currency ( NRFC) 
accounts of commercial banks. Issued with the maturities of 2 and 3 years and the interest 
rate linked to the London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR), SLDBs has been attractive among 
investors in recent years. Investors of SLDBs have been primarily the domestic commercial banks 
and in the recent past some banks have marketed SLDBs among foreign investors. The curren t 
share of SLDBs in the domestic debt portfolio remains around 7 per cent. 
PDFPAGE166
155
Managing the Public Debt
Foreign Debt
As a developing country, Sri Lanka had to seek the assistance of its development partners as 
domestic resources have not been sufficient to meet the public investment requirement. Borrowing 
from foreign sources first appeared in 1955 when the government borrowed from the International 
Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) for capital projects. Since then the contribution 
of project loans to finance the budget deficit continuously increased. This increasing trend has 
been rapid after 1977 with large inflows of foreign capital being received for economic and social 
infrastructure development projects. 
The project based financial assistance was received from various countries and bilateral 
sources. Countries such as Japan, Germany and China and the multilateral organisations like 
the Asian Development Bank and International Development Association were the dominant 
contributors of the foreign project and programme loans in the recent past. Japan has become 
the largest development partner of the country, contributing 23.7 per cent of total outstanding 
government foreign debt as at end 2010. After 2007, China has also emerged as a major  
development partner to the country with its share of total government foreign debt at 5. 1 per cent 
as at end 2010.  
Sri Lanka’s total foreign debt stock has shown a significant increase during the past 60 
years, with foreign debt to GDP ratio recording an increase from 3 per cent in 1950  to 36 per 
cent in 2010. As at end 2010, there were 703 active foreign loans in the foreign debt portfolio 
with the total outstanding balance of Rs. 2,025 million or 44 per cent of the total gov ernment 
debt portfolio. However, 63 per cent of this total foreign debt portfolio is on concessional terms 
and 69 per cent is from bi-lateral and multi-lateral donors with grace periods of 2 to 20 years 
and long pay back periods of 5 to 50 years. This nature of the foreign d ebt portfolio together 
with the current average interest rate of about 1.9 per cent per annum have eased the bur den of 
the foreign debt service payments of the country. In addition to the net borrowin gs from foreign 
sources, the depreciation of the LKR against major currencies also added a substantial amount to 
the expansion of the foreign debt stock in LKR terms.
Domestic Treasury bonds and bills market was opened to the foreign investors in 2006 
and 2008, respectively. In 2009, these markets were opened to Sri Lankan diaspora an d migrant 
workers abroad. However, those foreign investments were limited to a ceiling of 10 per cent 
of the total outstanding amount of Treasury bills and Treasury bonds. This initiative was not 
necessarily to raise foreign funds, but to make both Treasury bills and Treasury bonds market 
more competitive. The Bank has recognised the potential risk of a sudden withdrawal of for eign 
investors from Treasury bills and bonds markets as experienced in 2008 as an outcome of  global 
financial crisis and hence holds a buffer stock of foreign reserves to meet such contingencies. 
PDFPAGE167
156
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
Tapping International Capital Markets
Sri Lanka issued its first Floating Rate Notes of US dollars 50 million in the international capital 
markets in 1997. During the period 1977-2008, the country raised funds sev eral times through 
the international capital markets via various types of loan arrangements. In view of the declining  
access by Sri Lanka to concessional financing from the World Bank and ADB with its achievement 
of middle income status and the urgent need to implement several development partner-funded 
infrastructure projects in a timely manner, the government issued its debut international sovereign 
bond in 2007 to mobilise US dollars 500 million from international investors with a maturity 
of 5 years. With the improved investor confidence in the country after the end of the internal 
conflict and favourable growth prospects in the post-war period, the government successfully  
issued its second international sovereign bonds in 2009, amounting to US dollars 500 millio n 
with 5 year maturity. This bond offering attracted an orderbook that was over-subscr ibed by 
more than thirteen times, one of the highest level of over-subscription of any sovereig n US dollar 
bond offering during 2009. The government issued its third international sover eign bond in 2010, 
amounting to US dollars 1,000 million with 10 year maturity at the coupon rate of 6.2 5 per cent, 
which was significantly lower than the cost of borrowing of 8.25 per cent and 7.40 per cent on the 
international bonds issued in 2007 and 2009, respectively. 
The bond issues have established benchmark reference rates, which would enable the 
private sector to mobilise funds in the international market at competitive rates. Also these issues 
placed Sri Lanka ‘on the map’ as most of the portfolio investors who will become familiar with 
Sri Lanka’s credit record are likely look for other investment opportunities in the country. The 
proceeds of these sovereign bonds were used to part finance the capital expenditure programme of 
the government and restructuring of the debt portfolio to reduce the interest burden and improve 
debt profile. With Sri Lanka’s limited access to concessionary foreign financing in the future, 
international capital market funding is expected to remain a significant component of Sri Lanka’s 
borrowing programme. 
Debt Service and Interest Cost
Sri Lanka has an unblemished record of debt service for the past 60 years as it has never defaulted, 
suspended, rescheduled any of its debt service obligations. 1 This has attracted the confidence of 
foreign investors on Sri Lanka government debt. In terms of Section 113 of the MLA, the Central 
Bank has taken the responsibility of servicing of all debt taken by the government with close 
coordination with the Ministry of Finance, which maintains the Commonwealth Secretariat-Debt 
Recording and Management System (CS-DRMS) debt database. 
1 After the 2004 Tsunami disaster, Sri Lanka has been given a one to  three year debt moratorium by the Paris Club creditors, India 
and Korea with a view to allowing Sri Lanka to allocate more resources to  address humanitarian and reconstruction needs. In 
addition, outstanding debt to Italy was fully written off and that of China w as partly written off. The government of UK agreed to 
refinance 10 per cent of debt service payments made to the World Ban k.  
PDFPAGE168
157
Managing the Public Debt
Despite the initiatives of the Bank to develop the debt securities market and minimise 
interest cost, a sharp increase of the debt profile together with high interest rates owing to high er 
borrowing requirements and directions of monetary policy to maintain price stability, which will 
eventually stabilise interest rate, have made the interest cost a significant expenditure item in the 
current budget. In 2010, interest cost accounted for about 41 per cent of th e total government 
revenue and 26 per cent of the total government expenditure. Compared to the levels of  0.6 
per cent of GDP that prevailed at the time of independence, interest cost on public debt rose 
significantly to 6.1 per cent of GDP in 2010. In terms of total current government expenditure, 
interest cost increased to 36 per cent in 2010 from 4 per cent in 1948. 
Total public debt service payments, which remained around 1 per cent of GDP during the 
first two decades after independence, remained around 11 per cent during the 1990s. T his ratio 
has gradually increased to 14.6 per cent of GDP in 2010, mainly due to the expansio n of the 
outstanding debt portfolio. The external debt service ratio which is defined as the percentage 
of total external debt service payments to exports of goods and non factor services including 
workers’ remittances and compensation of employees, recorded 7.9 per cent in 2010.  
Market Developments
Primary dealer system and supervision
With a view to developing an active and efficient secondary market, an accredited Primary Dealer 
(PD) system was established in 1992 restricting the participation at primary market auctions to 
PDs. This system was replaced by the dedicated PD system in 2000 and PDs were given specific 
privileges and responsibilities such as rights to deal with the Central Bank as a counterparty in 
the primary market and engage in any secondary market transactions relating to Treasury bills 
and Treasury bonds for the PDs own account and for the account of any customer.  In 2009, the 
PDs were allowed to diversify their activities within certain parameters defined by the CBSL. The 
activities of PDs are supervised by the Public Debt Department through on-site examinations and 
continuous off-site surveillance. 
Transparency, predictability and price discovery
Transparency and predictability were given much attention in the recent years in managing public 
debt as it helps domestic debt market developments, indirectly helping to lower the cost of raising 
funds from the market. Towards this target, the publication of the annual public debt management 
report, regular update of the Central Bank website, issuance of press releases and regular dialogue 
with CEOs of PDs have been carried out. Further, towards this objective, an efficient real time 
price discovery process in the secondary market for Treasury bills, Treasury bonds an d SLDBs 
will be implemented in the near future. As a prerequisite, a benchmark yield curve of Treasur y 
bills and Treasury bonds has already been established.  
PDFPAGE169
158
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
Ownership Recording
In order to improve the efficiency of the payment and settlement system, the Central Bank 
introduced a Scripless Securities Settlement System (SSSS) and Central Depository System (CDS) 
in 2004, enabling real time settlement of securities trading on Delivery Vs Payment (DvP) basis. 
Under the SSSS, settlement and recording of Treasury bills and Treasury bonds are carried  out on 
an electronic system. The CDS (LankaSecure) maintains all information on trades and ownership 
of scripless government securities. Introduction of these systems significantly improved the 
efficiency of the government debt securities market by enhancing secondary market trading and 
eliminating risks associated with paper based securities. A record of ownership of external debt is 
maintained at CS-DRMS.
Risk Management of the Debt Portfolio
Management of risks associated with the public debt portfolio is a key aspect in relation to meeting 
the overall objective of debt management. Therefore, the Central Bank mitigates risks associated 
with its debt management activities by adhering to prudent risk management policies and 
targets. In the recent past, the Central Bank strengthened this aspect by establishing a sound risk 
management framework using a spreadsheet based risk scenario model, assessing a matrix of risk 
indicators in line with the best international practices and undertaking annual debt sustainability 
analysis. This risk model is heavily used in formulating the annual borrowing programme.  
Further, the Central Bank has identified a set of medium term targets for risk indicators to bring  
refinancing, interest rate and foreign exchange risks to prudent levels. Necessary measures to 
achieve these medium term targets have been taken through suitable actions such as extension of 
the maturity structure of the debt portfolio. 
PDFPAGE170
159
Since independence, the Sri Lankan government has invested heavily to develop the socio-
economic infrastructure in the country. Being a developing country with its savings not su fficient 
to meet the development aspirations of the country, the government had to seek foreign financial 
assistance to finance such investments. During the first four decades, foreign financial assistance 
was in fact available in the form of multilateral and bilateral concessional loans. However, with 
the development of the country towards middle income emerging market status, the availability 
of such concessional financing has been shrinking gradually requiring the country to look for 
alternate sources of external financing to finance the public investment programme. 
Accordingly, while implementing measures to attract foreign direct investment, a source of 
non-debt creating finance, the government decided to reap the benefits of the international capital 
market. Unlike the funds received through multilateral and bilateral sources, the receipts and use 
of which are subject to certain conditionalities, the government has the complete freedom in the 
use of funds raised in the international capital market. However, the government is disciplined 
by the dictates of the market forces and the terms of the funds raised in the capital market reflect 
the perception of the investors on the strength of the economy, particularly in honouring its 
obligations. 
The Sri Lankan government’s first step into the international capital market was in 1997 
by issuing a Floating Rate Note of US dollars 50 million. Although it had a good response 
from the international investors, for nearly a decade the country could not raise funds through 
Sri Lanka Steps into 
International Capital Markets
C.J.P. Siriwardena
Assistant Governor
16
PDFPAGE171
160
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
a similar issue in the international capital market at a reasonable price due to the aggravation of 
the internal conflict and weak macroeconomic environment that prevailed in the country. In th is 
backdrop several attempts were made to mobilise funds from international market through loan 
arrangements. These include three “Syndicate Loans” during 2000-2005 and a “Club Loan” in 
2008. Since the funds mobilised through the international loan market are relatively short term 
and the investors’ appetite for the size of the issue is also small for a country like Sri Lanka, such 
funding arrangements would not match with the long term funding requirement of the cap ital 
investment as well as key objectives of the prudent public debt management, i.e., extending 
maturity structure and yield curve, improving liquidity and broadening the investor b ase. 
In this context, the government of Sri Lanka decided to enter into the international capital 
market by issuing sovereign bonds and commenced preparatory work for the issue in early 
2000’s. Accordingly, two international rating agencies, namely, Fitch Rating and Standard and 
Poors’ (S & P) were appointed in 2005 to obtain sovereign ratings for the country by each of 
them. In addition, a sovereign rating advisor was also appointed to advice on sovereign  rating 
upgrades and to develop a strategy to enter into the international capital market. In line with 
these arrangements, necessary steps were taken to improve the macroeconomic environment of 
the country. With the completion of the preparatory work, the government was ready to issue its 
debut international sovereign bond in 2007.     
First Sovereign Bond Issue - 2007
The Central Bank, which has been entrusted with the responsibility of managing the public debt 
as an agent of the government, played a major role with the concurrence of the government 
Treasury in issuing the sovereign bond into the international market. The process involved from 
selecting international Lead Managers and working with them to fulfill the legal requirements, 
including keeping the documents ready to the listing of issued bonds at an international exchange 
for the secondary market operations. The work involved in the issue was handled by a Steering 
Committee comprising senior officials of the Central Bank and the government Treasury. On 
completion of an evaluation of proposals made by the selected leading international banks and 
investment houses, three international banks/investment houses; JP Morgan, Hong Kong and 
Shanghai Banking Corporation Limited (HSBC) and Barclays Capital were selected to act as 
Joint lead managers, Book Runners and Underwriters of the bond issue while Bank of Ceylon 
was appointed as a Co-manager. The bond was issued in October 2007, just after the Road Sh ows 
held in Singapore, Hong Kong, London, New York, Boston and Los Angeles.  
The bond issue was of the benchmark size of US dollars 500 million with a maturity period 
of five years and a fixed coupon rate of 8.25 per cent per annum. The issue was o versubscribed 
with total subscriptions amounting to 3.2 times the offer, attracting US dollars 1.6 billion fr om 
136 investors across Asia , Europe and U.S. comprising asset managers, banks, insurance and 
pension funds, retail and private banks and other funds. 
PDFPAGE172
161
Sri Lanka Steps into International Capital Markets
The bond issue was a success, especially as it was floated amidst multiple challenges both 
in the external and internal market. At the time the bond was to be launched, the international 
markets were affected by the emerging sub-prime crisis, which had not been envisaged initially, 
forcing investors eventually away from the market, posing a great challenge for emerging market 
debut sovereign bond issuers. Internally, the country was fighting a war against a terror ist group 
and at the same time, the main opposition political party opposed the sovereign bond issue 
strongly with a threat that they would not honour under their government, obligations arising 
from the bond issue. 
Despite all these issues, investors placed their confidence on the Sri Lankan bond taking into 
account macroeconomic fundamentals, future growth potentials and especially the unblemished 
record of debt service payments by the country in the past. Finally, the Sri Lankan bond issue was 
adjudged the Best Sovereign Bond Issue of the year by three international financial magazines, 
namely, Asia Money, Finance Asia and The Asset.  
Sri Lanka Entering a New Era
With the end of the civil war in May 2009, Sri Lanka has entered to a new era with mor e 
prospects for accelerating growth and development with the liberation of the Northern and Eastern 
provinces, integrating them with the rest of the country. It opened up resources in a vast area of 
the North and the East for development activities which are fully integrated with the mainstream 
economic activities in the country. It also removed the fear of any interruptions destructive to  
the economy and boost the investor confidence on the country. There was a further b oost to the 
investor confidence with the approval of the Stand-By Arrangement (SBA) facility by the IMF 
and official recognition by them of Sri Lanka as a country which has graduated to the statu s of a 
middle income country of the emerging world. 
The international investor confidence is reflected in investment in the capital market and the 
real sector including investments of US dollars 1.5 billion in government rupee securities by USA 
funds, the highest investment by a single country and heavy investments made by some Asian 
countries such as India, China and Malaysia in Sri Lanka. This behaviour of foreign investors 
showed their confidence on the future growth prospects of the economy. In order to gauge the 
appetite of global investors in Sri Lankan sovereign bonds, a global non deal road show was 
conducted in June 2009. It revealed that global investors have a significant positive sentiment on  
the new status of the Sri Lankan economy. 
Second Sovereign Bond Issue - 2009
Sri Lanka entered into the international capital market with her second sovereign bond issue in 
October 2009. Once again the bond issue was for US dollars 500 million with a maturity perio d 
of five years and three months (five year long bond), but with a much lower coupo n rate of 7.40 
PDFPAGE173
162
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
per cent per annum compared with 8.25 per cent coupon rate in the previous bond issue. The 
second sovereign bond issue repositioned the credit story of Sri Lanka among the international 
investors and attracted 269 investors based in the US (45 per cent), Europe (31 per  cent) and Asia 
(24 per cent). A major part of the issue, i.e., 78 per cent was allocated to fund man agers while the 
balance 22 per cent was distributed among banks, retail investors, insurance/pension funds and 
other investors. As in the first sovereign bond issue, three leading international investment ban ks 
and investment houses, namely, the Hong Kong and Shanghai Banking Corporation Limited 
(HSBC), JP Morgan and the Royal Bank of Scotland (RBS) functioned as Joint Lead Managers, 
Book Runners and Underwriters for this bond issue while Bank of Ceylon acted as a Co-manager.   
The second sovereign bond issue was launched at a time the capital markets globally, 
were recovering from the global financial crises following the sub-prime issue. However, it was 
a huge success with subscriptions amounting to over 13 times the offer, the highest level of over 
subscription to any sovereign US Dollar bond offer during 2009. The strong  response by the 
investors signified their heightened confidence on Sri Lanka and the country’s enhanced gr owth 
prospects following the end of the civil war. This bond issue was also adjudged the Best Deal of  
the Year 2009 in Asia-Pacific Region by The Banker Magazine.  
Third Sovereign Bond Issue - 2010
With two success stories of sovereign bond issues to its records, Sri Lanka once again entered 
the international capital market in September 2010. The third sovereign bond issue was for U S 
dollars 1 billion with a maturity period of 10 years. The coupon rate of the bon d was fixed at a 
2007 2009 2010 2011
Issue Size 500.0 500.0 1000.0 1000.0
(US$ mn)
Maturity (yrs) 5.0 5.25 10.0 10.0
Coupon (per 
cent)*
8.25 fixed/par 7.40 fixed/par 6.25 fixed/par 6.25 fixed/par
Issue rating B+ (Stable) - S& P B(Positive)- S& P B+ (Stable) - S& P B+ (Positive) - S& P
BB-(Negative)- Fitch B+(Stable) - Fitch B+ (Positive) - Fitch BB- (Stable) - Fitch
B+ (Stable)-Moodys’ B+(Positive)- Moodys’
Format 144A/RegS 144A/RegS 144A/RegS 144A/RegS
Lead Managers/ HSBC, JP Morgan, HSBC, HSBC, RBS, HSBC, RBS, BAML
 Book Runners Barclays Capital JP Morgan, BAML Barclays Capital
RBS
Listing Singapore Stock 
Exchange
Singapore Stock 
Exchange
Singapore Stock 
Exchange
Singapore Stock 
Exchange
 
*All were issued at par. Source: Central Bank of Sri Lanka
Table 16.1
Sovereign Bond Issues
PDFPAGE174
163
Sri Lanka Steps into International Capital Markets
Chart 16.1
Secondary Market Yield Curve for the Sovereign Bond Issues
lower level of 6.25 per cent per annum. Bank of America Merrill Lynch (BAML), Ro yal Bank 
of Scotland (RBS) and Hong Kong and Shanghai Banking Corporation Limited (HSBC) were 
appointed as the Joint Lead Managers and Book Runners for the bond issue while Bank of Ceylon 
was appointed as a co-manager. The main objective of this third bond issue was to extend the Sri 
Lankan sovereign yield curve in the international capital market up to 10 years, and dev elop a 
liquid benchmark yield curve for private sector investors in the economy. Even thoug h the global 
capital market has not fully recovered from the international financial turmoil, the bond issue was 
oversubscribed by 6.3 times. Orders were received from 362 investors globally. By geo graphic 
distribution, 52.5 per cent of the bonds were allocated to investors in the United States, 25 per cent 
to investors in Europe and 22.5 per cent to investors in Asia. By investor type, 85 per cent was 
fund and asset managers and the balance was to pension funds, insurance companies and banks. 
The proceeds of the bond were used for infrastructure development activities of the government 
and to restructure the government debt portfolio by retiring high cost domestic debt and short 
term debt. This bond issue was supported by the positive image of the country with enhanced 
credit ratings given by rating agencies.  
Fourth Sovereign Bond Issue - 2011 
The government of Sri Lanka decided to issue its fourth sovereign bonds in the international 
capital markets in July 2011. In order to maintain the long term yield curve, the tenure of the 
issue was again fixed at 10 years. The bond issue was for US 1,000 million and the coup on 
rate of the bond was fixed at 6.25 per cent per annum. This was a reduction of the spread by 41 
bps to 332 bps compared to the previous bond issue in 2010, which was issued at a spread of 
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Jun-09
Jul-09
Aug-09
Sep-09
Oct-09
Nov-09
Dec-09
Jan-10
Feb-10
Mar-10
Apr-10
May-10
Jun-10
Jul-10
Aug-10
Sep-10
Oct-10
Nov-10
Dec-10
Jan-11
Feb-11
Mar-11
Apr-11
May-11
Jun-11
Jul-11
Per cent
Sri Lanka 8.25% due 2012
Sri Lanka 7.40% due 2015
Sri Lanka 6.25% due 2020
Sri Lanka 6.25% due 2021
PDFPAGE175
164
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
373 bps. The role of lead managers and book runners was assigned to four international banks/
investment houses; Bank of America Merryl Lynch (BAML), Barclays Capital (BARCAP), Hong 
Kong and Shanghai Banking Corporation(HSBC) and Royal Bank of Scotland (RBS). As in the 
last three occasions, Bank of Ceylon was appointed as co-lead manager of the bond issue. The 
main objective of this bond issue was to maintain the liquid long term sovereign yield curve in 
the international capital market in order to guide the corporate sector in the economy. Despite the 
volatile international capital market due to sovereign debt related issues in EU and USA, the Sri 
Lankan bond issue was oversubscribed by 7.5 times. The heavy oversubscription was sup ported 
by the upgrade of country’s sovereign rating by all three international rating agencies; Fitch, 
Moody’s and S& P prior to the issue of bonds. Orders were received from investor s globally. By 
geographical distribution, 43 per cent of the bonds were allocated to investors in the United States, 
30 per cent to investors in Europe and 27 per cent to investors in Asia. By investor  type, 86 per 
cent was fund and asset management and the balance was to corporates, insurance companies and 
banks. Out of the total proceeds, US Dollar 500 million was reserved as a special deposit under 
the Ministry of Finance to match the payment obligation of the first sovereign bond to be matured 
in October 2012. The balance available funds will be used for infrastructure development projects 
operating under the government budget 2011. The success of this bond issue with o verwhelming 
demand shows the level of confidence of global investors on the improved economic fundamentals 
and credit story in the Sri Lankan economy. 
Concluding Remarks
The main features of the bonds issued are summarised in Table 16.1 for easy reference wh ile 
performances of the bond prices in the secondary market are depicted in Chart 16.1 Th ese 
features, mainly the developments in prices, reflect the improving confidence of investors in the 
country’s prospects in the future.
Since the issuance of the debut sovereign bond, the international community continuously 
watches the developments in the Sri Lankan economy, which are reflected in the movements of 
prices of bonds issued in the international market. Accordingly, the country is disciplined by the 
market forces and its accountability towards investors would have a positive influence on the 
economy and a positive impact on the sovereign rating in the future. Further, the Sri Lankan 
economy is growing at a rapid pace and the corporate sector too started to move into international 
markets to raise necessary long term funding. The sovereign bond issues have well established 
the benchmark to facilitate their entry to the international markets. 
Sri Lanka is determined to continue with marking its presence in the international capital 
market, which has enabled the country to raise funds at competitive rates to finance infrastructure 
projects and restructure some of the debt accumulated by financing development projects. It has 
also provided an added incentive for the authorities to be more prudent and implement policies 
with a long term perspective as the country is now subject to further attention of market forces, 
which while blessing “good behaviour” punish severely any “wrong-doing”.
PDFPAGE176
165
Introduction
Since its inception in 1950, the Central Bank of Sri Lanka has conducted a large number of 
statistical surveys on diverse subjects. The data collected in these surveys contributed not only to 
fill the lacunae of economic statistics during the early decades of the Bank’s history but also served 
in establishing a benchmark database for better understanding of the structure, characteristics and 
performance of the economy. The Consumer Finances Surveys (CFSs) are unique among them 
as they provide a spectrum of comparable and comprehensive data to assess over fifty years of 
development in social and economic conditions of the household sector, the largest sector in the 
nation’s economy. 
The Central Bank of Sri Lanka (then Ceylon) conducted the first ever All Island Household 
Consumer Finances Survey in 1953 1, and since then seven surveys have been conducted in 1963, 
1973, 1978/79, 1981/82, 1986/87, 1996/97 and 2003/04. Of th e eight surveys, the first three were 
known as Consumer Finances Surveys and the duration of the field work varied from 5 weeks in 
1953 to 2 months in 1973. The questionnaires were relatively simple and the field investigation  
Consumer Finances Surveys Conducted 
Since 1953 – What the Data Reveal
1 This survey was planned and conducted by the Economic Research Department under the guidance of Dr. B B Das Gupta, Director 
of Economic Research (DER), who was also instrumental in conducting nine ru ral surveys and one urban survey in the country 
during the 1937-1948 period. He served as DER from 1951-1956.
D. Wasantha
Director, Statistics Department
17
PDFPAGE177
166
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
1953 1963 1973 1978/79 1981/82 1986/87 1996/97 2003/04
1. Sample Size
(Households)
1,100 5,184 5,088 8,000 8,000 7,104 8,880 11,768
2. Sample 
Design and 
Stratification
Uni stage stratified 
random sample 
design. Population 
divided into 2 
Strata: Non-Estate 
and Estate sectors
Stratified 2
stage sample 
design. 
Population 
divided into 
12 Strata. 
Stratification  
by 3 sectors  
and 4 zones
Stratified 2 stage 
sample design. 
Population 
divided into 
13 Strata. 
Stratification by 
3 sectors and 5 
zones
Stratified 3 stage 
sample design. 
Population 
divided into 
13 Strata. 
Stratification by 
3 sectors and 5 
zones
Stratified 2 
stage sample 
design. 
Population 
divided into 
13 Strata. 
Stratification by 
3 sectors and 5 
zones
Stratified 2 stage 
sample design. 
Population 
divided into 
13 Strata. 
Stratification by 
3 sectors and 5 
zones
Stratified 3 
stage sample 
design. 
Population 
divided into 
13 Strata. 
Stratification by 
3 sectors and 5 
zones
Stratified 2 stage 
sample design. 
Population divided 
into 61 Strata. 
Stratification by 
25 Districts and 3 
sectors
3.Sampling 
Frame
List of households 
maintained by the 
Food Controller’s 
Department
List of 
households 
maintained 
by the Food 
Commissioner
Census Blocks 
prepared for the 
1971 Population 
Census by 
Department 
of Census and 
Statistics (DCS)
Census Blocks 
prepared for the 
1971 Population 
Census by DCS
Census Blocks 
prepared for the 
1981 Population 
Census by DCS
Census Blocks 
prepared for the 
1981 Population 
Census by DCS
List of 
households 
in towns 
and villages 
prepared by 
DCS
Census Blocks 
prepared for the 
2001 Population 
Census by DCS
4. Geographical 
Coverage
All Island All Island All Island All Island All Island All Provinces 
excluding the 
Northern and 
Eastern  
Provinces
All Provinces 
excluding 
the Northern 
and Eastern 
Provinces
All Provinces 
excluding 3 districts 
Killinochchi, 
Mannar and 
Mullaitivu in the 
Northern Province
5. Data 
Processing
The survey 
schedules were 
sent to Madras for 
the preparation 
of punched cards 
and electronic 
tabulation
Tabulation was 
done by the 
DCS, while 
coding was  
done by the 
CBSL
Conducted by the 
CBSL
Conducted by the 
CBSL
Conducted by 
the CBSL
Conducted by  
the CBSL
Conducted by 
the CBSL
Conducted by the 
CBSL
6. Duration of 
the Survey
5 Weeks 5 Weeks 2 Months One Year One Year One Year 15 Months (a) One Year
Table 17.1
Key Features of the Consumer Finances Survey Series 1953-2003/04
Source: CFS 2003/04 – Part 1 & CFS 1953
(a) The survey was initially planned to complete in 12 months. Due to u nanticipated reasons the survey period had to be extended to 15 mo nths.
PDFPAGE178
167
Consumer Finances Surveys Conducted Since 1953 – What the Data Reveal
was mostly outsourced. With the survey of 1978/79, the scope of the survey was expanded to cover 
a wider spectrum of socio-economic data to reflect the expansion of household economic activity 
parallel to the macroeconomic changes that took place in response to the introduction of the 1977 
economic liberalisation policy package. Accordingly, the survey series was renamed as Consumer 
Finances and Socio-Economic Surveys (CFS). The field enumeration was extended to 12 months 
in order to capture seasonal variations in full and was conducted by permanent employees of the 
Central Bank of Sri Lanka. However, following the voluntary retirement scheme of the Central 
Bank at end 2001, field investigation was once again outsourced in the 2003/04 CFS. 
The first three surveys, 1953, 1963 and 1973, were conducted at intervals of 1 0 years. The 
rapid economic and social transformation in the country with the introduction of the 197 7 policy 
package, persuaded policy makers to conduct the CFS at shorter time intervals of once every 5 
years. However, this plan could not be implemented consistently due to specific requirements and 
constraints during different periods. In fact, a survey was conducted within a shorter interval to 
assess the socio-economic development in Sri Lanka after the economic liberalisation of 1977. 
Later, owing to the security situation, the survey could not be conducted as planned in 1991/92. 
Consequently, the last four surveys were conducted at intervals ranging from 3 to 10 years. 
The geographical coverage of the respective surveys varied. The first five surveys up 
to 1981/82 covered the entire country. Due to civil disturbances in the country, th e next two 
surveys could not cover the eight districts of Jaffna, Mannar, Vavuniya, Mullaitivu, Killinochchi, 
Trincomalee, Batticaloa and Ampara in the Northern and Eastern provinces. However, the CFS 
2003/04 was able to include most of these two provinces due to two key factors. First, the Census 
of Population and Housing (Census) 2001 conducted by the Department of Census and Statistics 
(DCS), after a lapse of 20 years since the previous Census of 1981, provided the r equired 
sampling frame and second, the ceasefire between the government and the LTTE since February 
2002 provided the opportunity to conduct the survey in these two provinces. Only three districts 
of Killinochchi, Mannar and Mullaitivu in the Northern Province could not be included in this 
survey due to the non-availability of a sampling frame.
In previous surveys, a zonal structure of five homogeneous socio-economic zones was used 
for sample allocation and comparative analysis. This zonal structure was replaced by a provincial 
structure in the CFS 2003/2004.
Trends in Living Standards
The household surveys are the only source of data on the distribution of living standards in a 
country. The data gathered in these surveys provide information to study the trends in the living 
standards of the population in relation to key socio-economic characteristics such as household 
size, housing conditions, income, expenditure, labour force participation, employment and 
unemployment status of the household members, their level of education and health status. 
PDFPAGE179
168
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
Demographic Features
Over the past 40 year period, the average household size 2 had continuously declined from 5.75 
in 1963 to 5.62 in 1973 to 5.10 in 1986/87 and 4.31 in 2003/04. This declining trend has been 
observed in all three sectors (urban, rural and estate) in the country. In general, the deceleration of 
population growth following the family planning programmes in the 1960s and the shif t in social 
attitudes towards smaller families would have mainly contributed to the long term declining trend 
in the household size.
The gender composition, which is measured by the Male/Female sex ratio (number of 
males per 100 females) has shifted over the 40 years from 103/100 in 1963 to 91/100 in 2003/04. 
This was 113/100 in 1943 according to the Census of Population and Housing of DCS.
Table 17.2
Average Household Size and Gender Composition 1963 to 2003/04
1963 1973 1978/79 1981/82 1986/87 1996/97 2003/04
Average Household Size
 Urban Sector 5.97 5.78 5.67 5.50 5.17 4.89 4.44
 Rural Sector 5.70 5.63 5.49 5.20 5.09 4.56 4.28
 Estate Sector 5.80 5.24 4.73 4.80 4.78 4.74 4.56
 All Sectors 5.75 5.62 5.46 5.20 5.10 4.61 4.31
Sex Ratio(a) 103 101 96 96 94 94 91
Source: CFS 2003/04 - Part I
(a) Number of males per 100 females
The household population is gradually aging. The proportion of population aged 55 or over, 
the elderly population, has doubled from 7.2 in 1963 to 13.8 in 2003/0 4. Also, it had surpassed 
that of the 14-18 age group in 1996/97. The median age, the age at which 50 per cent of the 
population is older and 50 per cent younger, is another indicator of population aging. The median 
age has increased from 17 years in 1963, to 22 years in 1986/87, to 27 years in 1996/97, and to 28 
years in 2003/04. 
Housing Conditions and Amenities 
The quality of building materials used for housing construction have noticeably improved shifting 
housing structures from “semi permanent” type to “more permanent’ type. In 2003/04 br icks or 
cement blocks were used in wall construction in 76 per cent of houses while in 1953 wattle and 
2 A household refers to either a person living together in a housing unit and sharing common cooking arrangements. Such persons 
are treated as the members of that household.
PDFPAGE180
169
Consumer Finances Surveys Conducted Since 1953 – What the Data Reveal
Chart 17.1
 The Median Age of Population 1963 to 2003/04
Chart 17.2
Types of Construction (as a percentage of households) 1953 – 2003/2004
Chart 17.2a
Floor Type
Chart 17.2b
Wall Type
17
22
27 28
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
1963 1986/87 1996/97 2003/04
Years
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
1953
1963
1973
1978/79
1981/82
1986/87
1996/97
2003/04
Per cent
Clay Cement
Survey Period
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
1953
1963
1973
1978/79
1981/82
1986/87
1996/97
2003/04
Per cent
Daub Walls Brick Walls
Survey Period
Chart 17.2c
Roof Type
Chart 17.2d
Electricity
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
1953
1963
1973
1978/79
1981/82
1986/87
1996/97
2003/04
Per cent
Tiled Thatched
Survey Period
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
1953
1963
1973
1978/79
1981/82
1986/87
1996/97
2003/04
Per cent
Survey Period
PDFPAGE181
170
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
daub were used in 60 per cent of the houses. In 2003/04 cemented floors were available in 78 per 
cent of houses while 51 per cent of houses in 1953 had clay floors. Also, 57 per  cent of houses 
had thatched roofs in 1953. In 2003/04, however, tiles or asbestos roofing were available in 79 per 
cent of houses. 
Availability of electricity has shown a spectacular improvement over the years with the 
increase in generating capacity and commissioning of a large number of rural electrification 
programmes. Consequently, households with access to electricity had increased from 4 per cent in 
1953 to 75 per cent in 2003/04. A similar trend could be observed in all three sectors (urban, rural 
and estate) in the country.
The expansion in availability of electricity and the liberalisation of the economy led to a 
rapid growth in the possession of amenities and consumer durables in households. The pr oportion 
of households with a television increased from 4 per cent in 1981/82 to 71 per cen t in 2003/04. 
n.a – not available  Source: CFS 2003/04 - Part I
Table 17.3
Housing and Household Amenities (as a percentage of households)  
1953-2003/04 
Item 1953 1963 1973 1978/79 1981/82 1986/87 1996/97 2003/04
Housing Conditions
        Wattle & Daub Walls 59.5 54.9 44.2 38.9 43.4 39.7 23.3 12.5
        Brick Walls 28.9 34.3 25.0 25.2 26.2 35.0 54.0 55.4
        Clay Floors 50.7 40.3 44.9 45.4 41.9 39.3 25.9 14.5
        Cement Floors 24.7 38.6 45.0 54.4 52.5 58.5 73.2 77.9
        Thatched Roof 56.7 49.3 35.1 31.7 36.3 25.0 10.5 5.6
        Tiled Roof 27.6 36.6 33.6 42.9 39.1 45.4 58.3 58.6
Availability of Electricity 4.1 7.0 8.0 13.1 15.8 26.5 56.8 74.9
Availability of Equipment
        Radio n.a. 20.0 25.4 49.9 60.7 67.1 73.6 78.3
        TV n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a 3.8 19.6 50.6 70.8
        Refrigerator 0.9 1.0 1.3 2.3 2.9 8.1 16.8 29.7
        Washing Machine n.a n.a n.a n.a n.a 0.8 2.9 7.6
        Sewing Machine n.a 22.0 26.2 31.3 30.7 37.2 41.5 43.6
        Bicycle n.a n.a n.a 21.5 31.5 34.0 40.5 46.6
        Personal Computer n.a n.a n.a n.a n.a n.a 0.4 4.1
        Motor Bicycle n.a n.a m.a 0.9 2.4 5.3 12.0 16.3
        Motor Car n.a n.a n.a 1.9 2.3 3.0 3.4 5.8
PDFPAGE182
171
Consumer Finances Surveys Conducted Since 1953 – What the Data Reveal
Refrigerators were available in 30 per cent of the households, and 8 per cent of the h ouseholds 
had washing machines in 2003/04. The personal computer is a recent addition to Sri Lankan  
households. Between 1996/97 and 2003/04, the percentage of households with a per sonal 
computer had shown a tenfold increase from 0.4 per cent to 4 per cent.
Between 1978/79 and 2003/04 the availability of bicycles grew from 22 per cent to 47 per 
cent, while the availability of motor cycles increased more spectacularly by sixteen fold from 1 
per cent to 16.3 per cent. The availability of motor cars increased threefold. Radios and sewing 
machines are most common and longest serving consumer durables in households. In 2003/0 4, 
radios and sewing machines were available in 78 per cent and 44 per cent of the households,  
respectively, while in 1963 only 20 per cent and 22 per cent, respectively, of the h ouseholds had 
enjoyed these facilities. 
The health related indicators of the households have considerably improved. The percentage 
of households without latrine facilities have declined from 18.5 per cent in 1953 to 5. 6 per cent 
in 2003/04, and the percentage of households with pipe borne water has increased fro m 11.3 per 
cent in 1953 to 38.9 per cent in 2003/04.
Education 
There has been a remarkable progress in literacy with overall literacy rate increasing from 79.4  
per cent in 1963 to 85.4 per cent in 1981/82 and to 92.5 per cent in 2003/04. This has been 
observed for both males and females. From 1963 to 2003/04, literacy rates of males and females 
have increased by 8.5 per cent and 27 per cent, respectively, narrowing the literacy gap  between 
males and females from 15.7 per cent in 1963 to 4 per cent in 2003/04. 
Educational attainment of the population has significantly improved over time. In 2003/04, only 8 
per cent of the population was without any education compared to 42 per cent in 1953 . Also, the 
proportion of persons with only primary education had decreased significantly from 47 per cent in 
1953 to 35 per cent in 1996/97 and to 30 per cent in 2003/04, while those with secondary and post 
secondary education have noticeably increased from 12 per cent in1953 to 61 per cent in 2003/04.
Table 17.4
Educational Attainment
(As a percentage of population aged 5 years and above)
Level of Education 1953 1963 1973 1978/79 1981/82 1986/87 1996/97 2003/04
No schooling 41.8 26.8 22.9 14.9 15.1 11.8 8.6 7.9
Primary 46.8 45.5 43.2 43.8 42.9 41.1 35.2 29.9
Secondary 9.8 22.7 27.3 29.8 29.2 35.5 35.5 41.0
Post secondary 1.8 5.0 6.6 11.5 12.8 20.7 20.7 21.2
Source: CFS 2003/04 - Part I
PDFPAGE183
172
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
Labour Force, Employment and Unemployment
The Labour Force is the sum of all employed and unemployed persons. The Labour Force 
Participation Rate (LFPR), the ratio of the Labour Force to the total population, was not stable 
over the years and varied from 40 per cent in 1953, 31.7 per cent in 1963, 33.9 per cent in 
1973, 38.0 per cent in 1978/79, 34.3 per cent in 1981/82, 39.7 in 1996/97 and 38.9 per cent in 
2003/04. This may be partly due to slight differences in the definitions of both emplo yment and 
unemployment and the different reference periods used in these various surveys. Similar trends 
could be observed in the LFPRs of both males and females. However, throughout the per iod, the 
male LFPR continued to remain around twice the female LFPR.
There has been a significant shift in the employment structure. The relative share of 
employment in the agriculture sector had declined from 53 per cent in 1963 to 33 per cent in 
2003/04. The share of the manufacturing sector employment increased from 10 per cent in 1963 
to 26 per cent in 2003/04 while that of services sector employment increased from 37 per cent 
in 1963 to 41 per cent in 2003/04. This is in line with the structural change obser ved in Gross 
Domestic Product (GDP) and also those noted in developed countries in the process of their 
development. 
Chart 17.3
Literacy Rates 1963 to 2003/2004
70
75
80
85
90
95
100
1963
1973
1978/79
1981/82
1986/87
1996/97
2003/04
Survey period
per cent
All Male Female
PDFPAGE184
173
Consumer Finances Surveys Conducted Since 1953 – What the Data Reveal
The unemployment rate had declined from 16.6 per cent in 1953 to 9 per cent in 2003/04. 
The highest unemployment rate of 24 per cent was recorded in 1973. Except in 195 3, the 
unemployment rate among females was more than double that of males. 
Table 17.5
Labour Force, Employment and Unemployment
1953 – 2003/2004
1953 1963 1973 1978/79 1981/82 1986/87 1996/97 2003/04
Labour Force (a) 40.0 31.7 33.9 38.0 34.3 38.1 39.7 38.9
 Male 56.0 n.a. 48.0 50.1 49.7 51.7 53.0 54.3
 Female 22.9 n.a. 19.8 26.0 19.4 25.4 27.3 24.9
Employment (b) 
 Agriculture, Forestry
  and Fishing
n.a. 53.0 54.5 48.3 51.2 47.7 37.7 32.8
 Industry n.a. 10.0 11.7 20.9 19.5 21.6 25.6 26.0
 Services n.a. 37.0 33.8 30.8 29.3 30.7 36.7 41.2
Unemployment rate (c) 16.6 13.6 24.0 14.7 11.7 15.5 10.4  8.9
 Male 15.3 n.a. 18.9 9.2 7.8 11.3 6.4 6.3
 Female 20.0 n.a. 36.4 24.9 21.3 23.6 17.5 14.2
(a) as a % of population
(b) as a % of employed by industrial sector 
(c) as a % of labour force aged 14 and above
Source: CFS 2003/04 - Part I
Chart 17.4
Employment Structure 
1963 and 2003/2004
Chart 17.4.a
1963
Chart 17.4.b
2003/04
Agriculture, 
Forestry 
and Fishing
53%
Industry
10%
Services
37%
Agriculture, 
Forestry 
and Fishing 
32.8%
Industry
 26%
Services
41.2%
PDFPAGE185
174
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
In general, the unemployment rate is lowest among those with no schooling and with 
only primary level education, while the rate increases with the level of education. From 1953 
to 2003/04, although the unemployment rate had fallen at every level of education, rate among 
the educated has remained comparatively high with double digits. This in turn, may imply the 
necessity for introducing appropriate reforms both to the educational system and to the labour 
market to ease the problem of educated unemployment in the country. 
Income and Income Distribution
The monthly average income per spending unit 3 and per income receivers 4 stood at Rs. 15,400 
and Rs. 10,754, respectively, in 2003/04 compared to Rs. 169 and Rs. 108, respectively, in 1953. 
When 2003/04 income is computed based on 1953 prices, a 2 per cent per year increase in real 
terms is registered for both groups. 
3 A spending unit consists of one or more persons who are members of th e same household, but who take independent decisions 
individually or with their own dependents in respect of spending their inco me.
4 A person who received an income from any source whatsoever du ring the six months immediately prior to the date of the first visit 
to a household. Different surveys, however, have specified different minimum income levels for the person to be qualified as the 
income receiver (IR) as follows:
CFS 2003/04 : One month income Rs. 250 or six months income Rs. 1500
CFS 1996/97 : One month income Rs. 125 or six months income Rs. 750
CFS 1986/87 : One month income Rs. 50 or six months income Rs. 300
CFS 1981/82 : One month income Rs. 30 or six months income Rs. 200
CFS 1978/79 : Six months income of Rs. 180
CFS 1973      : IR is defined without specific minimum income
CFS 1963      : IR is not defined
CFS 1953      : IR is not defined
Chart 17.5
Unemployment Rates 
1953 to 2003/2004
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
1953
1963
1973
1978/79
1981/82
1986/87
1996/97
2003/04
Survey period
per cent
Overall Male Female
PDFPAGE186
175
Consumer Finances Surveys Conducted Since 1953 – What the Data Reveal
In 1953, there was a considerable degree of inequality in the income distribution. The 
poorest 40 per cent of the spending units received only 14.5 per cent of the to tal income, whereas 
the richest 20 per cent received 53.8 per cent of the income. Consequently, 80 per cent of all 
spending units received 46.2 per cent of the total income. During the next three decades, income 
distribution improved in favour of the lower income spending units. 
Table 17.6
Income Distribution
(Percentage of Income Received by Spending Units)
 Income Group 1953 1963 1973 1978/79 1981/82 1986/87 1996/97 2003/04
Poorest 40% 14.5 14.65 19.29 16.64 15.25 14.14 15.73 14.10
Middle 40% 31.7 34.03 37.76 34.28 32.75 33.47 34.89 34.10
Richest 20% 53.8 52.31 42.95 49.08 52.00 52.39 49.38 51.70
Gini Ratio 0.46 0.45 0.35 0.43 0.45 0.46 0.43 0.46
    
By 1973, the share of total income received by the poorest 40 per cent of spending units 
increased to 19.3 per cent and that of the richest 20 per cent had declined to 43 per cen t. The Gini 
Ratio, which indicates the overall income distribution position, improved from 0.46 in 195 3 to 
0.35 in 1973.
During the post 1977 period, the economic liberalisation policies generated a wide range 
of new economic activities, resulting in an accumulation of profits in the upper income deciles in 
the early years of liberalisation. Consequently, the overall income distribution started to worsen  
in 1978/79 and continued until 1986/87. The share of income in the richest 20 per cent increased 
from 43 per cent in 1973 to 49 per cent in 1978/79, and further to 52.4 per cent in 1986/87. 
However, the share enjoyed by the poorest 40 per cent continuously decreased from 19 .3 per cent 
in 1973 to 16.6 per cent in 1978/79 and to 14.1 per cent in 1986/87.
The trend of worsening income inequality reversed somewhat during 1990s, redistributin g 
the overall income towards the middle and the poor income groups. The income share of th e 
middle income group, increased from 33.5 in 1986/87 to 34.9 per cent in 19 96/97 while that of 
poorest group, income share increased from 14.1 per cent to 15.7 per cent. Dur ing this period, the 
share of the richest 20 per cent declined from 52.4 per cent to 49.4 per cent. 
However, from 1996/97 to 2003/04 the income distribution worsened again skewing 
towards the richest. The overall Gini Ratio increased from 0.43 in 1996/97 to 0.46 in  2003/04. 
The income share of the poorest 40 per cent decreased from 15.7 per cent in 1996/97 to 14.1 per 
cent in 2003/04 while that of the richest 20 per cent income increased from 49.4 per cent to 51.7 
per cent during this period. 
Source: (i) Economic Progress of Independent Sri Lanka
            (ii) CFS 2003/04 – Part I
PDFPAGE187
176
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
Consumption Expenditure
With the increase in income levels, the composition of the household expenditure pattern 
significantly changed. The expenditure share of consumption has shifted from food to housing, 
communication, consumer durables and medical services. The food share has declined from 60 
per cent in 1953 to 38 per cent in 2003/04. During the period, the share o f housing increased 
from 3.6 per cent to 10.7 per cent, communication from 2.6 per cent to 8.8 per cent, consumer 
durables from 3.2 per cent to 8.9 per cent and medical services from 1.3 per cent to 3.4 per cent, 
respectively. 
Consumption of key food items had not changed dramatically. Per capita consumption of 
rice and coconut had remained the same, while that of wheat flour, bread and sugar had declin ed. 
From 1996/97 to 2003/04 per capita consumption of wheat flour, bread and sugar  declined by 6.1 
per cent, 34 per cent, and 2.7 per cent, respectively.
Chart 17.6
Gini Ratio 
1953 -2003/2004 
0.30
0.35
0.40
0.45
0.50
0.55
1953
1963
1973
1978/79
1981/82
1986/87
1996/97
2003/04
Spending Unit Income Receivers
PDFPAGE188
177
Consumer Finances Surveys Conducted Since 1953 – What the Data Reveal
Conclusion
The Consumer Finances Survey series confirm that the living standard of the household sector 
in the country has significantly improved during the fifty year period from 1953 to 2003. The 
findings of the surveys also revealed that aging population, rising income inequality, relatively  
low female labour force participation and their high unemployment rate were some of the key 
issues faced by the sector during the period.
Source: CFS 2003/04-Part I
 Table 17.7
Expenditure Shares 1953 to 2003/04
1953 1963 1973 1978/79 1981/82 1986/87 1996/97 2003/04
Expenditure
Rs. Per month
   Per Spending Unit 162 191 310 877 1,570 2,175 8,592 15,278
   Per Person 34 36 58 179 318 534 2,012 3,936
Expenditure Shares, %
   Food 59.9 56.3 55.4 56.7 56.5 52.2 48.4 37.9
   Clothing and Apparel 7.9 9.6 7.6 10.6 7.7 7.6 6.3 8.3
   Housing 3.6 7.3 6.8 5.8 5.9 7.8 10.8 10.7
   Medical 1.3 2.8 1.6 1.7 1.6 2.2 2.4 3.4
   Education 2.0 1.8 2.2 1.6 1.6 2.1 2.3 3.0
   Transport and
  Communication
2.6 2.3 3.4 4.5 3.9 4.9 5.3 8.8
   Fuel and Light 2.0 4.4 4.2 3.9 5.2 4.6 3.9 4.4
   Consumer Durables 3.2 0.4 6.0 4.6 6.4 5.2 6.7 8.9
   Interest on Debt 0.7 0.8 0.1 0.4 0.5 0.9 2.1 1.5
   Other 16.8 14.3 12.7 10.2 10.7 12.5 11.8 13.1
PDFPAGE189
178
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
PDFPAGE190
179
The Employees’ Provident Fund (EPF) is the largest superannuation fund in Sri Lanka. It covers 
nearly 60 per cent of the workforce in the private and semi-government sectors. The total assets 
of the Fund stood at around Rs. 900 billion as of end December 2010. It accounts for nearly 13.4 
per cent of the country’s total financial sector assets. Its size is 16 per cent in terms of the Gro ss 
Domestic Product of Sri Lanka. EPF is being built up by the mandatory monthly contributions 
made by both the employer and employee to the EPF Department and the income generated 
through investing such funds. All members are ensured the receipt of a positive real rate of return 
on the balance lying in their accounts as at the end of each year. Over the last five decades, E PF 
has consistently strived to pay maximum retirement benefits to its members or their legal heirs 
through prudent investment of the Fund while ensuring its safety and the sustainability.  
Evolution 
The concept of EPF traces back to 1947, when the Report of the Commission on Social Services 
headed by Sir Ivor Jennings recommended the establishment of a national provident fund,  on 
a contributory basis. Though the necessity of a superannuation fund to provide security at the 
old age for non-pensionable workers was widely accepted, it took eleven years to materialise 
this concept. The Employees’ Provident Fund Bill presented by Hon. T. B. Ilangaratne, the 
then Minister of Labour, Housing and Social Services on 12 February 1958 was passed in the 
Providing Social Security through 
Employees’ Provident Fund
Mrs. R. Dheerasinghe
Superintendent, Employees’ Provident Fund Department
18
PDFPAGE191
180
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
House of Representatives 1 and assented by the Governor General on 09 May 1958. Accordingly, 
the Employees’ Provident Fund was established on 01 December 1958, under the Employees’  
Provident Fund Act No 15 of 1958. Hon. T B Ilangaratne noted in his speech while presenting the 
Bill “the scheme has been conceived primarily as a means of providing retirement benefits to the 
employee at the time when due to advanced age, they are unable to work.” 
Prior to the establishment of EPF, there existed a few private provident funds or pension  
schemes established by some employers for their employees, of which the terms were more 
favourable than those provided by EPF, and in some they were similar. However, all such schemes 
were confined to limited groups of employees and none of them covered the employed at larg e, 
particularly those in the plantation sector. Hon. Peter Keuneman at the second reading of the Bill 
specifically mentioned that the major improvement in the Bill over the exiting schemes is “that 
instead of trying to discriminate among different sections of workers on racial grounds or any 
other grounds, this Bill brings in all categories of workers and employees without discrimination.” 
Accordingly, EPF was created to cover all private and semi-government employees who were not 
entitled to other forms of retirement benefit schemes such as pensions, approved provident fu nds 
and approved contributory pension funds. It also covers those who are employed on casual and 
temporary basis and the estate workers.   
At the inception, the contribution to the Fund was at 4 per cent by the employee and 6 
per cent by the employer of the salary of the employee. These rates were increased to 6 per 
cent and 9 per cent in February 1971 and further to current rates of 8 per cent and 12 per cent, 
respectively in 1981. Currently, it is mandatory for all semi-government institutions and pr ivate 
sector companies even with one person employed to pay contributions to EPF. 2 Though initially, 
the law had exempted male and female employees who have passed the age limit of 55 and 50, 
respectively from payment of contributions, this upper age limit was removed in1985. 
Administrative Framework 
In terms of the EPF Act, the Monetary Board of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka is entrusted  with 
the responsibility of managing the Fund as its custodian, while the general administration of the 
Fund is vested with the Commissioner of Labour (CL). As the operational arm of the Monetar y 
Board, the EPF Department was set up at the Central Bank. This department is assigned with 
several functions, such as the collection of member contributions and surcharges, the maintenance 
of individual accounts for each and every member of the Fund, investment of funds in a prudent 
and professional manner while safeguarding the wealth of the Fund, crediting annual interest 
1 Hon R.E. Jayathilaka, Hon I.M.R.A. Iriyagolla and Hon Mrs. Kusuma Ra jaratna voted against the bill since they believed that the 
inclusion of estate workers who are non citizens of the country under the  EPF Act is unacceptable. 
2 The Government employees and members of any private Pension/Provide nt Fund approved by the Commissioner of Labour are 
exempted from paying contributions to EPF. However, if a member of a n Approved Provident Fund leaves employment and joins 
an institution liable to pay EPF, the balance in credit of his account shall transfer to EPF.
PDFPAGE192
181
Providing Social Security through Employees’ Provident Fund
to member accounts calculated on the year end balances of individual accounts, refunding  of 
member balances to eligible members as per the instructions issued by CL, preparation of annual 
accounts and issue of semi- annual statements of accounts to the members.  
As the administrator of the Fund, the Department of Labour (DL) is entrusted with 
several functions such as the registration of employers and members with the Fund, carrying 
out of inspections to ensure the compliance with the EPF Act and taking legal actions against 
non-payment of member contributions, the recovery of surcharges on late contribution s from 
employers, the authorisation of the amalgamation of previous accounts of a member enabling the 
legitimate member to obtain the benefits and the approval of housing loans enabling members to 
obtain housing loans from approved lending institutions by pledging their member balances.
Membership 
The Fund, which was first inaugurated with specifically named 54 establishments covering public 
corporations and large private companies now cover more than 62,000 semi-government an d 
private establishments. Number of members of the Fund increased substantially over the last 50 
years from about 6,000 members at the end of 1959 to 13.3 million as at end 2 010, of which 2.3 
million are active members.3 Though number of inactive accounts is as high as 11.0 million, most 
of these accounts belong to the active members who have previously worked in other institutions 
under different identification numbers. 
3 Active members are the employees whose contributions are currently sent to the EPF Department by their employers. Inactive 
member accounts do not receive current contributions but hold a balance to the credit of the respective account of members.
Chart 18.1
Membership and Contribution
-
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
1973
1975
1977
1979
1981
1983
1985
1987
1989
1991
1993
1995
1997
1999
2001
2003
2005
2007
2009
Number (mn)
-
10
20
30
40
50
60
Rs  bn
Contributing Non Contributing Contributions
PDFPAGE193
182
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
Member Contributions
Other than a few institutions that make contributions at higher rates at their discretion, at present 
majority contribute to the Fund at rates of 8 per cent and 12 per cent, respectively, b y employee 
and employer of the total monthly earnings of the employee. The employers who have failed to 
send the contributions of a particular month to the EPF Department on or before the last working 
day of the following month are liable to a surcharge up to the maximum of 50 per cen t of the due 
amount based on the length of the delay. The annual collection, which was Rs. 12 million in 1959, 
has increased gradually to Rs. 54.8 billion in 2010 with the increase in the number of member 
accounts and the rise in wages of employees. This also includes the surcharges collected from 
employers who have failed to fulfill the obligations under the EPF Act. 
Fund Management 
The overall objective of the Fund in investing its money is to provide a reasonable return  to the 
members, while safeguarding and enhancing the value of the Fund. In terms of Section 5(e) of the 
EPF Act, the Monetary Board has the power to invest the moneys of the Fund in such secur ities 
as the Monetary Board may consider fit and sell such securities as and when it is necessary.  
Since the inception of the Fund, almost 98 per cent of its moneys were invested in 
government securities while the balance was in corporate debt instruments. For the first time in 
the history, EPF invested Rs. 33.4 million 4 of its funds in the equity market by purchasing shares 
of Ceylon Grain Elevators and Lanka Lubricants on 24 April 1998. Total investment in the equity 
market stood at Rs. 384 million by end 1998. Though investments in equity market in creased 
to Rs. 9.8 billion in 2009 and 43.7 billion in 2010, 94 per cent of the EPF investments are still 
invested in government securities.
  The investment climate in the country changed drastically with the end of decades-long 
war in 2009 and the improvements in the economy. Sri Lanka’s stock exchange today is considered 
to be one of the best performing exchanges in the world reflecting the massive peace dividend 
that has been generated. At the same time, the government is also committed to reduce its fiscal 
deficit, over the next few years resulting in a reduced borrowing requirement. The gov ernment’s 
target is to reduce the budget deficit to GDP ratio from 8 per cent in 2010 to 6.8 p er cent in 2011. 
Currently, a one percentage point reduction in budget deficit will lower the government borrowing 
requirement by about Rs.60 billion. Since the budget deficit is expected to decline further in the 
medium to long-term resulting in reduced borrowing by the government, shifting a p art of the 
EPF funds to other profitable investment avenues such as listed and unlisted equities, debentures 
and mortgage backed securities, is considered as a prudent investment strategy for managing EPF 
Funds. In this backdrop, EPF decided to make a strategic move towards other instruments, which  
provide good yields while securing the safety of the Fund. 
4 This amount consisted of investment of Rs. 3.1 mn. in Ceylon Grain Eleva tors and Rs. 30.3 mn. in Lanka Lubricants.
PDFPAGE194
183
Providing Social Security through Employees’ Provident Fund
The banking and financial sector is the largest sector in the Sri Lankan equity market with 
more than 22 per cent of the total market capitalisation. This sector has always been performing 
exceptionally well and therefore, since 2005, the EPF had invested in the sector with the intention  
of creating more wealth for the millions of EPF members in the long-term. Presently, the EPF’s 
exposure to the banking sector is around two per cent of its total portfolio. In addition to the 
banking sector, EPF has also invested in other sectors including construction and engineering , 
manufacturing, hotel and travel, telecommunication, and diversified holdings in the Colombo 
Stock Exchange, and in other instruments such as debentures, mortgage backed securities and 
selected private equities. With a long term focus, currently EPF has invested more than Rs. 100  
million each in fundamentally sound stocks of 51 companies and amounts less than Rs.100 
million in 38 more companies. 5 EPF’s investments in the share market have enabled millions of 
its members to indirectly own a stake in some financially stable, fast growing companies and to 
reap the benefits of the stock market boom. At the same time, EPF will continue to be able to 
pay interest at a high rate to its members on their balance. Currently, EPF has no exposure to the 
foreign exchange market or foreign assets. 
  During 2010, equity investments by EPF have been able to generate an income of Rs. 1 .7 
billion, which included both capital gains and dividends. In addition, EPF also recorded Rs. 16 
billion of unrealised gains from its equity portfolio. Furthermore, EPF earned Rs. 118 .2 billion 
from interest and amortisation gain securing total income of Rs. 121 billion in 2010. 
Benefits 
Interest Income 
Statutorily, all the members of the Fund are eligible to receive an interest at a rate not less than 
two and a half per cent per annum, approved by the Monetary Board with the concu rrence of the 
Ministers in charge of Labour and Finance. As seen in Chart 18.2, the Fund has pro vided returns 
at equal or at a higher rate than the statutorily stipulated rate of nominal interest to its members in 
the past. It also maintained a positive real rates of return over the last 25 years 6 and also expects 
to maintain an average real rate of return of over 1.5 per cent to its members in the nex t 5 year 
period. 
Preserved Benefits 
The members are eligible for withdrawing the benefits by (1) reaching retirement age of 55 
years for males and 50 years for females, (2) retiring in the case of female members within th ree 
months before marriage or within 5 years after marriage, (3) joining pensionable employmen t, (4) 
5 As at 31 March 2011.
6 Over the past 25 year period, EPF has paid an average real interest ra te of 1.25 per cent to its members.
PDFPAGE195
184
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
Chart 18.2
Growth of the Fund and Rate of Return
Chart 18.3
Refund Payments
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1,000
1980
1982
1984
1986
1988
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
2010
Rs. bn
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Per cent
Value of the Fund Interest rate
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
1973
1975
1977
1979
1981
1983
1985
1987
1989
1991
1993
1995
1997
1999
2001
2003
2005
2007
2009
Rs (bn)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Number (000)
No. of Refunds Amount
PDFPAGE196
185
Providing Social Security through Employees’ Provident Fund
migration, or (5) ceasing employment for the reason of permanent and total incapacity to wo rk. 
In the case of death of a member, his/her nominees or heirs are eligible to receive the benefits. A s 
shown in Chart 18.3, every year, EPF makes a considerable amount of refunds to its memb ers. 
Currently, total amount of funds paid out as benefits range around 30-35 billion  per annum. 
However, average amount of a refund paid per member is still around Rs. 200,000. This raises the 
question whether such a small amount of savings could provide a comfortable retirement life to a 
person at his old age after 20-30 years of service. 
Other Benefits 
Under the EPF Amendment Act No 42 of 1988, members of EPF are permitted to pledge the 
funds to obtain a loan of up to 75 per cent of the balance to the credit of the account in the case of 
active members and 50 per cent for inactive members for housing purposes. 7 The objective of this 
scheme is to assist members to own a house, which is also a kind of social security for old age, 
while securing the retirement benefits. However, 30 - 40 per cent of the loans granted und er this 
scheme are being defaulted every year. The Fund is annually transferring a considerable amount 
of funds in member accounts to lending institutions to cover the defaulted balances, which include 
interest at a penal rate plus various other bank charges. Members who default the loan payments 
suffer due to diminution of the retirement benefits, which otherwise they would have enjoyed. The 
objective of the Fund is to provide a contended retirement life to its members but this purpo se is 
lost due to heavy defaults. EPF together with the DL has initiated a programme in co-ordination 
with banks to reduce defaults while enhancing the awareness of the members on the importance 
of repaying the loans as scheduled. 
Other Existing Superannuation Schemes 
Government Pension Fund
Over 1.2 million public sector employees are eligible for getting government pension at their 
retirement age. Persons who are eligible for government pension is entitled to a monthly pension 
based on the last drawn salary and service period. A minimum of 120 months of gross government 
service is required to be eligible for a pension. In addition, death gratuity, special compen sation 
to officers who sustain injuries or die while on duty and compensatory pension for dep endent are 
some of the benefits of government pension.
The Employees’ Trust Fund
The Employee’s Trust Fund established under Act No 46 of 1980 provides superan nuation 
benefits as well as a series of other social and economic benefits such as financial assistance 
for heart surgeries and kidney transplant, education scholarships for children of member s, low 
7 Currently 5 lending institutions namely, State Mortgage and Investment Bank  (SMIB), Housing Development Financial Corporation  
      (HDFC) Bank, Bank of Ceylon, People’s Bank and Co-operative Rural Banks provide loans under this facility.
PDFPAGE197
186
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
interest housing loan schemes etc. to its members. All public sector employees who are not 
entitled to the Govt. Pension Scheme and all private sector employees are members of this Fund 
while their employers are required to send 3 per cent of the gross earnings of their employees 
to the Fund on monthly basis. This is a non-contributory benefit to the member as only  the  
employer makes a contribution on behalf of the member to the Fund. In addition, self  employed 
persons have also been made eligible to obtain membership of this Fund in terms of section 
18 of the Employees’ Trust Fund Act. No 46 of 1980. Self employed abroad wer e also made  
eligible under the Employees’ Trust Fund (Amendment) Act No.47 of 1988. Total wealth of the 
Fund was about Rs 103 billion by end of December 2010. The Fund serves for about 2.1 million 
members. 
Private Provident/Pension Funds
At the time when the EPF was established there were several private pension/ provident funds 
managed by private institutions. Currently 171 such funds approved by the Department of Labour 
serving 157,494 members are operating in Sri Lanka. Members of these funds are eligib le for 
more or equal benefits enjoyed by the members of EPF. The EPF (Amended) Act No 6 of 1975 
prohibits creation of such new funds and makes it compulsory for all private sector employers 
and employees to contribute to EPF. However, an amendment to the EPF Act in 2009 allows such 
existing approved provident funds to create pension funds if desired. 
Proposed Benefit Schemes 
Early Withdrawals for Housing and Medical Purposes 
The cabinet has recently granted approval enabling the refund of up to 30 per cent of the balance 
of individual accounts for housing and medical purposes. Even though, such a f acility may 
improve the welfare of the members, and eliminate some weaknesses in the existing housing loan 
scheme, this proposal too dilutes the original objective of the Fund. Therefore, implementation 
procedures and guidelines of this scheme have to be laid down carefully to preserve the ob jective 
of the Fund.
Pension Fund 
Most of the EPF beneficiaries who withdraw money from the Fund use them for one time 
investment such as construction or development of a house or meeting social obligations such as 
dowries, weddings or education of children. Some lose their funds by investing in inap propriate 
ventures. Only a few beneficiaries who receive large sums of money as benefits invest their funds 
wisely and secure their retirement life. Therefore, in view of providing monthly remuner ation at 
the retirement age, a proposal to establish a contributory pension fund for the semi-gov ernment 
and private sector employees is now in the process of being approved by the Parliament. It has 
PDFPAGE198
187
Providing Social Security through Employees’ Provident Fund
been proposed to establish two pension funds to cover Sri Lankans working abroad and self-
employed persons who are not eligible for any form of superannuation benefits under  existing 
pension or provident fund schemes.
Enhanced Social Security through Repositioning EPF for the  
New Era
EPF is committed to be the most caring superannuation fund in the region, enabling its members 
to have a contented retirement life. In line with the strategic objectives of the Central Bank of Sri 
Lanka, which celebrates its 60th anniversary in 2010, EPF is in the process of re-engineer ing its 
functions to provide a more efficient service to its members.  
EPF Department which was a victim of the terrorist attack on the Central Bank in January 
1996 suffered due to the interruption to the computerised database and destruction of bulk of 
its documents. Details of the payments made were gathered from preserved archives of the 
then banking department to ensure the refund payments. The archives of the EPF Department 
containing the original files relating to information about member contributions and the master 
files carrying member details were saved and transferred to the new office and resumed operations 
immediately on manual basis. Gradually the EPF administration took initiatives to computerise its 
rebuilt database and major operational functions under a modernisation programme commenced 
in 1996. Initially, internal operations of the Fund were computerised with software develop ed 
in-house by the Central Bank’s staff. An AS-400 type platform of high capacity was intro duced 
to operate all functions through a computer based system in 1998. Furthermore, the accou nting, 
material management and fund management functions were automated from manual to a computer 
based system through software called “SAP” in 2006. Though, these systems have enabled the 
improvement of accuracy and efficiency of the work processes, the re-engineering process has 
been initiated with assistance of the IT Department of the Central Bank to meet the needs of an 
emerging economy and to cater to a larger number of members with greater efficiency. The re-
engineering process will convert the current system to a double entry based ledger system which 
will lay the foundation for EPF to move to a fully IT based Banking Model by 2012. The new 
AS-400 System has commenced its live operations with effect from 01 January 2011. 
Parallel to the computer system for re-engineering, EPF launched a new project called “Re-
registration” in collaboration with DL to register all existing EPF members based on the details 
in their National Identity Card (NIC). Under this system, existing employer centric identification 
system will be transformed into a member centric identification system. The first phase of the 
project was concluded on 30 October 2010. Under this project NIC information of nearly 800,000 
members were collected and the Fund is now in the process of registering them under the New 
Member Registry maintained in the EPF database. 
Learning through experience, the Phase 2 was redefined to eliminate the weaknesses 
and the high cost involved in the data collection process. Under the new phase of the pro ject, 
a new member registration form namely “Form RR6” has been introduced to register all new 
PDFPAGE199
188
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
recruits on real time basis with effect from 1 November 2010. All registered employers and all 
new employers who will commence business in future are required to furnish NIC details of 
new employees recruited after 1 November 2010 through “Form RR6” along with the member  
details (Form C/C3) when their first EPF contribution is sent to the EPF Department of the 
Central Bank, in addition to the “Forms A, B and H”, which should be submitted to the labour  
office within 14 days of recruitment. Further, employers having employees who have not y et  
submitted their NIC details under Re-registration Project are also requested to submit their NIC 
information through “Form RR6”. Duly completed “Form RR6” should accompany a photocopy 
of the NIC of the employee, certified by the employer with his signature and the company 
stamp. With the successful completion of this project, EPF is expected to register almost all 
active members of the Fund under the New Member Register and assign their NIC number as 
their unique identification number. This system will enable EPF to manage its database more 
systematically and also to amalgamate the numerous accounts of an individual member under 
the unique identification number. The re-engineering programme once completed would reduce 
the time involved in the refund process considerably, enabling EPF to provide a more ef ficient 
service to its members. 
Currently, the establishments that have 150 or less are required to send details of members 
such as name, EPF member number and NIC number, if available, by filling a form called “Form 
C” together with contributions (the amount to be credited to the particular member) while the 
establishments with more than 150 employees should send such information by completing a form 
named “Form C3” every 6 months i.e., June and December of the year. This procedure in volves 
a heavy cost to the Fund and delays of crediting the member balances to the individual accounts 
as EPF has to wait till member details are received, enter this information to its computer system 
and check the accuracy. Therefore, the existing system of collecting information in printed f orm 
is expected to be replaced with an electronic data collection system soon. The electronic data 
collection and funds transfer mechanisms called ‘e-collection” and “direct debit” systems, which 
expect to collect all details of members through electronic means such as e-mail, CD, Web, etc., 
and transfer their member contribution electronically are now in progress. Once these projects are 
completed, EPF would be able to credit at least 80 per cent of its member accounts within 1-3 
days of receiving money and relevant member information. These systems will also reduce the 
cost involved in processing data substantially while assuring the accuracy of the data. Currently, 
more than 1,000 employers covering more than 13 per cent of the total membership use electronic 
means of data transmission (either e-mail, or CD) to send the member information. An awareness 
programme is now underway to educate the remaining employers on the new system and to bring 
them into the process.
EPF is also required to preserve the member details until they reach the retirement age to 
ensure that each legitimate beneficiary receives entitled benefits accurately. The Image Scanning 
Project, which expects to scan all the archival documents while scanning the current documents 
PDFPAGE200
189
Providing Social Security through Employees’ Provident Fund
on real time basis will comm ence in June 2011. Under this project all scanned documents will be 
stored electronically enabling retrieval of data for easy reference. This project will reduce the cost 
of storing, handling and securing printed information and the time consumed for r etrieving the 
files. 
Success of the EPF re-engineering process depends mainly on the awareness of both 
employers and the members on the work that EPF is doing for their benefit. Therefore, it is 
important to ensure that all four parties, i.e., staff of EPF, labour officers, members and employers 
join hands collectively to achieve the objectives of these projects. An aggressive awareness 
campaign is now in progress to involve all four parties together to work as a team. Further more, 
EPF is to launch a campaign to expedite the issuance of NIC to EPF members with assistance of 
the Registrar of Persons. In addition to awareness programmes mobile services are organised to 
cover all three sectors, i.e., urban, rural, estate and print and electronic media are widely used  to 
get the message across the people. The entire effort of re-positioning EPF to best suit the needs 
of the new era will reduce the cost of managing the Fund while ensuring higher benefits to th e 
members. 
Summary 
EPF was created as a social security scheme for securing superannuation benefits at the old  
age of the employees who are not eligible to receive any other form of superannuation b enefits.  
In keeping with its statutory obligations, EPF, as the largest superannuation fund in Sri Lanka, 
has provided retirement benefits worth more than Rs. 258 billion to 2.6 million members  
during the last four decades. Honouring the trust that the government had placed in th e Central 
Bank, the Fund has been managed prudently while enhancing and safeguarding the wealth of  the 
Fund. 
With the changes in the investment climate of the country and the government’s commitment 
to reduce its budget deficit, the Fund is facing a new challenge to look for alternative investment 
opportunities. The Fund should be ready with its manpower and skills to face this challenge 
probably to look for investment opportunities in the international markets. Addressing the issue of 
inadequacy of the retirement entitlement of the beneficiaries to have a safe and contended retired 
life and to provide a suitable scheme for self employed people and Sri Lankans employed aboard 
who are not covered by EPF or any other superannuation scheme are other major challeng es 
faced by the Fund. However, EPF has planned to face these challenges in the new era with its 
dedicated and committed staff. 
EPF has given attractive returns to its 13.3 million members in the past. In 2009, EPF gav e 
benefits at 13.75 per cent on member balances, which is by far the highest ever rate of retu rn 
declared by the Fund. It would also ensure giving out a better positive real rate of return to all 
its members in the future. Several strategic measures have been put in place to minimise the cost 
PDFPAGE201
190
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
and improve efficiency of EPF operations. EPF being the largest single fund, which guaran tees 
maximum possible social security to its members at their retirement, will continue to discharge 
its responsibilities and duties within its legal framework in a professional and prudent manner, 
providing an efficient and caring service to its members. 
References 
Central Bank of Sri Lanka. “Database of the Employees’ Provident Fund.”
---. Employees’ provident Fund Annual Accounts, 1998.
---. Press Releases of the Employees’ Provident Fund, Various Issues.
Government of Ceylon. “Employees’ Provident Fund Act No.15.” 1958.
---. “National Provident Fund Bill Second Reading.” 1958. Hansard V ol. 30.
PDFPAGE202
191
Central banks are not supposed to engage in economic activities directly in view of unfavourable 
monetary implications of such interventions. However, due to practical reasons, in many 
emerging economies, central banks have undertaken a pivotal role in the developmental activities 
at different degrees in order to meet the requirements arisen at different stages of the economic 
development process. The Central Bank of Sri Lanka (CBSL) has also adopted a similar policy 
by paying special attention to ensure a regular flow of financial facilities towards regional 
development activities under different programmes and credit lines that are exclusively designed 
for meeting the development needs of different sectors and regions. Such attempts substantially 
promoted financial deepening in the country on the one hand while contributing to the growth 
of the regions on the other. “In the conceptual framework of financial deepening, it h as been 
accepted that financial deepening promotes economic growth.” 1
W.M. Karunaratne
Assistant Governor
Special Attention to Special Needs –
Central Bank Focuses on Regional 
Development
1 W.M. Hemachandra (2005), Page 1.
The Author acknowledges the valuable comments and suggestions made by Dr. D.S. Wijesinghe, former Deputy Governor of the 
Central bank of Sri Lanka and Dr. Koshy Mathai, IMF Resident Representative to Sri Lanka. However, they are not responsible for the 
writer’ s views on the subject.
19
PDFPAGE203
192
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
Delivery of Development Credit 
Given the preponderance of the agriculture sector in the economy, the CBSL since its inception 
has provided leadership and direction in evaluating the problems and enhancing the availability of 
credit to this sector.2
The CBSL was requested to enter into the development credit disbursement process 
subsequent to the withdrawal of government Departments from credit delivery scenario in the 
rural sector in late 1960s. During the first two decades of the post independence era, a viab le 
rural credit system was not in existence in the country, and in the absence of such a rural banking 
network, government departments were requested to undertake the credit disbursement function in 
the rural sector. Accordingly, since independence, credit disbursement in the regions was carried 
out by the Departments of Food and Agriculture, and Agrarian Services in collaboration with the 
cooperative movement in the country. Due to improper delivery systems and inherent weaknesses 
of the programmes, recovery of loans became a serious issue during this period.
In response to the high rates of loan defaults by the borrowers, a new scheme known as the 
New Agricultural Credit Scheme (NACS) was introduced in 1967. “This was a pioneering effort to 
transfer rural credit operations from government departments to the banking sector.” 3 NACS was 
introduced by the CBSL in collaboration with the government with a view to granting production 
credit for the farmers through People’s Bank which was established in 1961 for the sole purpose 
of expansion of banking facilities to the regions. The new credit scheme was supported by 100 
per cent refinance from the CBSL and a 75 per cent Credit Guarantee from the government, under 
which the government agreed to compensate up to 75 per cent of any losses incurred by the bank 
under NACS. Initially loans were granted mainly for cultivation of paddy, but later in 1973, the 
scope of the scheme was extended further to cover paddy and other field crops (OFCs) and  also 
implemented through broader participation of financial institutions, admitting Bank of Ceylon 
(BOC) and Hatton National Bank (HNB) as Participating Credit Institutions (PCIs) under the 
scheme. Subsequently in 1986, the scheme was further modified, introducing innovative featur es 
to ensure smooth and cost effective operations for mutual benefits to both lenders and bor rowers. 
Interest Subsidy Mechanism
In view of adverse monetary implications, the CBSL terminated the provision of refinance 
out of the CBSL funds in 1994, and the government has undertaken the liability in respect of 
concessionary lending to agriculture to be met out of the budget. Accordingly, the scheme was 
modified to continue with the government interest subsidy. The Participating Financial Institutions 
(PFIs) were requested to grant loans at concessionary terms out of their own resources and the 
interest loss to the PFI has been compensated by paying an interest subsidy out of the government 
2 Central Bank of Sri Lanka (1986), Page 189.
3 Central Bank of Sri Lanka (1986), Page 194.
PDFPAGE204
193
Special Attention to Special Needs – Central Bank Focuses on Regional Development
budget. As shown in Chart 19.1, this has been proved a very successful mechanism to ensure 
flow of bank credit to the domestic agriculture sector. This shows that a small amount of less than 
Rs.3/- spent on interest by the government is enough to motivate the PFIs to release Rs. 100 out 
of their own resources to the domestic agricultural sector, which was earlier considered as one of 
the most risky areas for financing.  
Building a Viable Rural Credit Structure
At the inception, the CBSL had five main objectives as specified in Section 5 of the Monetary Law 
Act (MLA) No.58 of 1949. Among the five, two objectives were directly related to develop ment 
purposes specified as the promotion and maintenance of a high level of production, employ ment 
and real income and the encouragement and promotion of the full development of the productive 
resources of Sri Lanka. Accordingly, the Bank established two separate departments namely (a) 
Development Finance Department in 1976 for the evaluation and facilitation of medium and 
long term development projects in the tourism industry and export sector and (b) Rural Credit 
Department in 1980 for promoting agricultural finance in the country.
However, in the initial period, the CBSL involvement was confined only to facilitate the 
delivery of rural credit mainly for cultivation purposes as the government policy was also directed 
towards achieving self sufficiency in food, particularly in rice. However, with the emerging 
demand for credit from different segments of the rural population, the CBSL has also been 
requested to play a vital role in delivery of diversified financial facilities for a wider range of 
regional based economic activities since early 1970s. In a developing economy, a sound rural 
Chart 19.1
Progress of Loan Disbursements to the Domestic Agricultural Sector with 
the support of Interest Subsidy by the Government
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
3,000
3,500
4,000
4,500
5,000
5,500
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
Rs mn
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
Rs mn
Total amount of cultivation loans granted by PFI's (LHS)
Interest subsidy paid by the government (RHS)
PDFPAGE205
194
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
credit system has a definite role to play in the area of economic and social upliftment of the people 
in the regions. When drafting the MLA, John Exter also believed that a country could not be fully 
developed without a flow of uninterrupted credit. 4 Similar to other neighbouring countries, Sri 
Lanka too has identified multiple benefits of a sound rural credit system to be operative in the 
regions. 
Primarily, the government is responsible for development of such a viable rural credit 
system for regional development in a country. In Sri Lanka, the CBSL, as the apex institution in 
the banking sector, has gradually undertaken this responsibility on behalf of the government. Since 
early 1970s, the CBSL has been playing a proactive role as a promoter of development oriented 
credit schemes on the one hand and a principal credit disbursement agency for the regions on the 
other. The objective of the CBSL involvement in credit disbursement in the regions is, therefo re, 
basically to facilitate the government policy towards development in the regions more effectively. 
The CBSL has been engaged continuously in credit disbursement through PFIs for 
a wider range of regional specific economic activities covering cultivation of short term food 
crops, perennial crops, farm power machinery, pre and post cultivation requirements, marketing 
of agricultural produce, promotion of agro based rural industries, fisheries, animal hu sbandry 
activities, self employment, small trade, and also promotion of income generating activities 
among low income people for poverty reduction.
Formal Sector Credit Expansion
With the successful and effective participation of the CBSL in the delivery of development 
credit in the regions, it has been observed that a remarkable improvement has taken place in the 
formal sector credit expansion in the rural sector. According to consumer finance surveys, th e 
share of formal sector credit has increased from 25 per cent in late 1960s to 40 per cent of the 
total credit requirement in mid 1980s. The corresponding figure reported in the latest con sumer 
finances survey conducted in 2003/04 was 64 per cent. As the agent of the government to promote 
government policy objectives towards rural finance, the CBSL has been able to guide the formal 
institutional sources effectively in the regions as key suppliers of a variety of financial services 
to the regions. Due to direct intervention of the CBSL, the financial sector capability in respect 
of development financing has also been improved remarkably. Chart 19.2 shows the expan sion of 
development credit in the regions under the programmes implemented by the CBSL.
As observed by the CBSL, state banks play a much involved role in expanding access 
to finance in the regions. “Evidence suggests that if state banks are made to operate in an 
economically viable way, there are opportunities to increase outreach and expand financial 
access particularly in rural and agricultural areas where private sector penetration might be 
4 D.S. Wijesinghe (2009), Page 46.
PDFPAGE206
195
Special Attention to Special Needs – Central Bank Focuses on Regional Development
limited.”5 In this sector, the government policy objective is also very clear under which the  
government recognises that the agriculture sector contributes to regionally equitable economic 
growth, rural livelihood improvement and food security through efficient production  of 
commodities for consumption, for agro based industries, and for exporting competitively to the 
world market.6
Medium and Long Term Credit Fund (MLTCF)
In the context of the overall success in the expansion of rural finance over the years, a common 
understanding has been established among the stakeholders that the Central Bank should promote 
further economic activities by taking the leading role among the formal financial institutions in 
the delivery of development credit and other financial services through PFIs into the regions.  In 
recognition of the need for intervention in the area of regional development, the CBSL has taken 
measures to create the appropriate environment within the Bank. Accordingly, the MLA was 
amended in 1963 to introduce “Part IIIA – Medium and Long Term Credit Operations with Credit 
Institutions” under which the Medium and Long Term Credit Fund (MLTCF), a special fun d for 
provision of refinance facilities to PFIs, was established in 1964. Though many development 
projects in the agriculture and industry sectors usually require a long gestation period fo r success, 
5 Alliance for Financial Inclusiveness (2009), Page 16.
6 Mahinda Chinthana Vision for a New Sri Lanka (2006), Page 3.
Chart 19.2
Expansion of Development Credit - 2004 - 2010
-
10,000
20,000
30,000
40,000
50,000
60,000
70,000
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009
No of Loans
10,000
15,000
20,000
25,000
30,000
Rs mn
No of Loans (LHS) Loans Amount (RHS)
PDFPAGE207
196
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
banking institutions are somewhat reluctant to grant medium and long term loans out of their 
own resources, since the bulk of their funds is mobilised through short term deposits and demand 
deposits. With the establishment of the MLTCF, the CBSL was in a position to provide long 
term financial facilities of up to 15 years to PFIs with respect to the loans granted by them for 
any productive purpose in agriculture, industry, tourism, trade and commerce as defined by the 
Monetary Board for the purpose of MLTCF. It has been observed that with the availability of 
refinance support from the CBSL, PFIs have also changed their stand towards granting facilities 
for development projects that require longer gestation/repayment period. 
Credit Guarantee System
Although Small and Medium Scale Enterprises (SMEs) play a vital role in the  
economic development process, they continue to experience constraints when accessing  
formal sector finance. The four factors that cause market failure in the credit market for SMEs  
are high administrative costs for small scale lending, asymmetric information, high risk  
perception on small firms and lack of collateral. This market failure justifies government 
intervention.7
The CBSL intervention was also sought to provide a solution to the collateral issue 
as commercial banks mainly depend on collateral in making their credit decisions. Due to the 
inability to provide bankable security, many talented new entrepreneurs who possessed viable 
project proposals, particularly in the regions, were deprived of obtaining facilities from the formal 
banking sector even under the refinance schemes. Under these circumstances, the CBSL has taken 
significant efforts to change the attitudes of bankers, i.e. reorientation of traditional practices b y 
introducing the concept of project based lending in which the lenders were requested to con sider 
the cash flow and the viability of the project as collateral. In order to strengthen the effor ts of 
the CBSL further in this area, the MLA was amended in 1974 to introduce the Credit Guarantee 
mechanism under Section 108(A) by which the CBSL was empowered to issue guarantees to PFIs 
on account of loans and advances granted by them for development oriented economic activities 
in the country. 
Training of Rural Bankers
Further, in order to enhance the capacity and effectiveness of rural bankers in the field of 
development credit, the CBSL established the Rural Banking and Staff Training College (RB 
& STC) in 1979, for conducting training programmes mainly on techniques relating to project 
oriented lending. The objective of such training programmes was to develop a set of ban k 
personnel within the system equipped with innovative methods, appraisal techniques and delivery 
7 A.S. de Alwis (2009).
PDFPAGE208
197
Special Attention to Special Needs – Central Bank Focuses on Regional Development
systems to undertake the challenging task of disbursement of development credit in the regions. 
Subsequently, the name of the College was changed as Centre for Banking Studies (CBS) with 
the expansion of its scope for training.  
Further, the CBSL has taken steps to strengthen its developmental role by establishing 
its own Provincial Offices in Matara (1980), Anuradhapura (1982), Matale (1985) an d recently 
in Jaffna (2010), and Trincomalee (2010) to coordinate, promote and implement development 
activities in the respective provinces. Provincial Offices are continuously engaged in training of 
bankers in rural finance.
Development of Financial Institutions
In addition to the above, from the early period, the CBSL has been engaged in a wider range of 
activities relating to institutional building and system development appropriate for the promotion 
of development credit in the regions.
In recognising the need for provisioning long term capital for development projects 
undertaken by the private sector in the fields of agriculture, industry and commerce, the CBSL  
assisted the government to establish the Development Finance Corporation of Ceylon (DFCC) in 
1955.
On a proposal made by the CBSL to promote agricultural credit in the regions, the People’s 
Bank was established by the government in 1961 under the People’s Bank Act No.29 of 1961.
Later, in 1979, the CBSL contributed to the capital in the formation of the National 
Development Bank (NDB) which was established under the National Development Bank of Sri 
Lanka Act No.2 of 1979, for the sole purpose of provisioning medium and lo ng term finance for 
development activities, particularly in the regions. 8
The CBSL, going deeper into the regional development objective, has taken initiative to 
establish district based Regional Rural Development Banks (RRDBs) in 1985 with 100 per cent 
capital ownership. The RRDBs were encouraged to deviate from centuries old lending policies 
and practices of commercial banks and to adopt innovative methods as much as possible in credit 
delivery for development activities in the regions. The CBSL established 17 such RRDBs in 
17 districts of the country, and subsequently they were merged on provincial basis to set up 6 
Regional Development Banks (RDBs) under the Regional Development Banks Act in 1997. Later, 
the share ownership held by the CBSL in RDBs was divested to the government. Subsequently, 
the government restructured the RDBs by amalgamating them into one national bank under the 
name of Regional Development Bank (RDB) in 2010.
8 Central Bank of Sri Lanka (1990).
PDFPAGE209
198
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
Promotion of Microfinance among Low Income Segment 
of the Population
Central banks in emerging economies are in a position to play a key role in the development of 
microfinance through appropriate policies, systems and tools that enable the financial system to 
penetrate the microfinance markets. However, the general tendency is that in the absence of a 
conducive environment, the formal financial system is somewhat reluctant to reach the low income 
households. Under similar circumstances, the CBSL adopted a supportive policy for promoting 
financial systems to reach the microfinance market on a sustainable basis. As a supportive and 
supplementary measure, the CBSL has undertaken the responsibility of implementation of 
microfinance programmes through PFIs on behalf of the Government of Sri Lanka (GOSL).  
Small Farmers and Landless Credit Project (SFLCP), the first microfinance project of this nature 
implemented by the CBSL, was introduced in four districts in the country with the support of the 
International Fund for Agriculture Development (IFAD) and the GOSL in 1989. The pr oject was 
titled as ‘ISURU’ and the CBSL adopted credit plus approach in the implementation of the project 
in association with Regional Rural Development Banks (RRDBs). The project was instrumental 
to make the rural bankers aware of many low cost innovative approaches developed in line 
with Grameen model (Bangladesh) Self Help Group (SHG) methodology. ISURU has become 
a popular rural finance programme of the relevant RRDBs during 1990s and was able to pr ovide 
financial assistance to over 250,000 beneficiaries in the 4 districts.
In late 1990s, the government entered into a Loan agreement with Japan Bank for 
International Cooperation (JBIC) to receive funds for implementation of similar microfinance 
project in other six districts and authorised the CBSL, as an executing agency, for the 
implementation of the project. Accordingly, Poverty Alleviation Microfinance Project (PAMP) 
commenced operations in 2000. PAMP I assisted approximately 200,000 low income families 
to obtain financial facilities from RDBs for improvement of their income generating activities 
(IGAs) in the six districts. Subsequent to the conclusion of PAMP Phase I, JBIC and the GOSL  
entered into an agreement for expansion of microfinance in the conflict affected Northern and 
Eastern regions in particular. Accordingly, PAMP Phase II has been commenced operations in 
14 districts including all 8 districts in the North and East in 2009. At the same time, the CBSL, 
as an executing agency of several other projects, supported by IFAD, has engaged in p romotion 
of microfinance through formal financial sector institutions in different parts of the countr y. 
In microfinance delivery under the projects, target beneficiaries were organised under SHG 
methodology and they were provided with credit for commencement of Income Generating 
Activities (IGAs) along with a package of necessary services including training/awareness 
on financial literacy, entrepreneurship development and required skills. Further, provision of 
market linkages for their produce has also been arranged where necessary. The CBSL was able 
to bring approximately 600,000 low income families into the formal financial sector under the 
PDFPAGE210
199
Special Attention to Special Needs – Central Bank Focuses on Regional Development
microfinance poverty alleviation programmes, during last two decades, and impact evaluation 
studies have confirmed that 65 percent of beneficiaries under microfinance programmes were able 
to cross the poverty line within 3–5 year period. 9
Special Programmes to Meet Urgent Requirements
As the apex financial institution in the country, the CBSL has clearly demonstrated its commitment 
towards the development of regional economic activities by introducing a concessionary credit 
line with 100 per cent refinance support from the CBSL to facilitate the affected enterprises by 
the Tsunami disaster which destroyed the entire coastal economy in 2004. The CBSL announced 
its own relief credit package under the name of ‘SUSAHANA’ within two weeks of the disaster, 
allocating Rs.3,000 million for refinance to PFIs that grant facilities to directly affected SMEs in 
the coastal areas. Thereafter, in association with the Ministry of Finance and Planning, carried out 
a series of negotiations with the Japan Bank for International Cooperation (JBIC), United Nations 
Development Fund (UNDP), French Development Association (AFD) and European Investment 
Bank (EIB) for borrowing funds for utilisation under refinance loan schemes. Accord ingly the 
Regional Development Department of the CBSL was able to disburse a total amount of Rs.8,500 
million among 13,596 SMEs under 5 special credit lines during 2005-2007 (Chart 19.3). Over 56 
per cent of affected SMEs have been financed by PFIs, facilitating them for resumption of th eir 
business activities under the above programmes (Chart 19.4). 
Chart 19.3
Resumption of SMEs in the Tsunami-affected Provinces
9 Impact Assessment Survey of the Small Farmers and the Landless Credit Project - 2 005
-
2,000
4,000
6,000
8,000
10,000
12,000
Southern
Province
Western
Province 
Northern
Province
Eastern
Province
No of Industries affected by Tsunami
No of projects financed by CBSL
PDFPAGE211
200
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
Further, just after the end of the conflict in the North and East, the CBSL has introduced 
two loan schemes with 100 per cent refinance from the CBSL, i.e. special credit line for the 
development of the East (2007) and “The Awakening North” for the resumption of economic 
activities in the North in 2009. This shows the timely involvement of the Bank at the time of 
disasters to rebuild the economy in the affected regions.
Balanced Regional Development
Despite the efforts made by successive governments to enhance the regional economic conditions 
during the past, regional economic disparities still remain to be balanced in favour of the 70 per 
cent of the total population living in the regions outside the Western Province of the country. In 
terms of the composition of GDP, Western Province has emerged as the principal contributor 
representing over 45 per cent of the GDP while other 8 provinces are sharing the balance. This 
indicates the disparities prevailing in the distribution of benefits of economic growth among 
the regions. The ultimate objective of all national development programmes would be the 
enhancement of the quality of life of all citizens living in the country.
This policy objective is clearly visible and emphasised in the ‘Mahinda Chinthana’ 
policy statement of the government. In order to achieve its regional development objectives, th e 
government has accelerated the public investments in infrastructure development, undertaking 
several mega projects to be completed in the regions by 2016. Further, development in the 
agriculture sector has been given utmost priority in the policy agenda to ensure food security for all 
Chart 19.4
Resumption of Tsunami-affected SMEs under 5 special (relief) credit 
schemes implemented by CBSL
56%
44% No of applicants not obtained facilities 
from PFIs due to fulfilment of their 
livelihood requirements under other 
relief programs implemented by 
Government and Non Government 
Organisations (NGOs) - 10,181
No of SMEs received financial 
assistant under 5 special (relief) credit 
schemes implemented by CBSL - 
13,596
5 Relief Schemes
Susahana 5,297
Smal Business 5,235
Jeevana Sakthi 3,102
EIB (B) 180
Construction 142
PDFPAGE212
201
Special Attention to Special Needs – Central Bank Focuses on Regional Development
while contributing to rural poverty reduction. At the same time, rebuilding of economic and social 
life of the people in the conflict affected Northern and Eastern provinces has also become anoth er 
priority area in the government’s development policy agenda.
In line with the government’s policy objectives, the CBSL has launched several special 
programmes complementary to the government development initiatives in the regions. 
Accordingly, credit delivery in the agriculture sector was intensified in order to attain self 
sufficiency in several food crops and liquid milk production in the country by 20 16. In this effort, 
the government has extended the facilities already available for the farming community under the 
New Comprehensive Rural Credit Scheme (NCRCS) to cover more crops and activities related to 
agriculture.10 The CBSL stepped in 1998 to introduce a Forward Sales Contract (FSC) system to 
ensure an agreed price for the major agricultural crops produced by the farmer commun ity.11 The 
CBSL promoted the FSC system among the farmers and commodity buyers in the country. Since 
FSC assures price and market for several food crops, PFIs were able to disburse more credit to the 
farming community with confidence of loan recoveries. Chart 19.5 shows that even a single cr op 
could also be promoted under FSC coupled with disbursement of credit for cultivation.
One of the objectives of the promotion of FSCs among the farming community was to 
stabilise the market prices of agricultural commodities in the market. Chart 19.6 shows that 
current market prices of paddy have mostly been determined around Forward price decided at the 
beginning of each cultivation season.
Chart 19.5
Expansion of Maize Production 2005 - 2009
10 Mahinda Chinthana Vision for a New Sri Lanka (2006), Page 7.
11 W.A. Wijewardena, (2009), Page 10.
	  -­‐	  	  	  	  
	  2,000	  	  
	  4,000	  	  
	  6,000	  	  
	  8,000	  	  
	  10,000	  	  
	  12,000	  	  
	  14,000	  	  
2005	   2006	   2007	   2008	   2009	  
No	  of	  FSCs	  
Chart	  18.5	  Expansion	  of	  Maize	  Produc:on	  2005	  -­‐	  2009	  
No	  of	  FSCs	  signed	  for	  Maize	  (LHS)	  Maize	  ProducDon	  (RHS)	  
PDFPAGE213
202
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
Recent Developments
Regional Development Department continues to implement the schemes discussed above, 
providing PFIs with 100 per cent refinance from the CBSL for the resumption of econo mic 
activities in agriculture, industry and commerce in the conflict affected Northern and Eastern 
regions. In addition, another credit line (Saubagya) supported by refinance from the CBSL has also 
been introduced recently for the benefit of new entrepreneurs and affected enterprises in the Small 
and Medium Scale Enterprises (SME) sector in the country. Concurrently, a new Credit Guarantee 
Scheme has also been introduced to encourage the PFIs, particularly in the SME sector lending 
facilitating the demand from such new economic activities expected to be generated through 
public investments programmes in the regions. At the same time, the CBSL has been engaged 
in a massive programme to eradicate poverty by adopting Self Help Group (SHG) mechanism 
in 14 selected districts including all 8 districts in the Northern and Eastern provinces on behalf 
of the government. “Expansion of microfinance programmes under SHG mechanism could help  
to alleviate the problem with regard to collateral to a certain extent as beneficiaries could then 
make use of inter se guarantee.” 12 The SHG mechanism has been adopted by the CBSL under 
the ongoing poverty eradication programmes with a view to promoting financial inclusiveness 
and thereby reduce the incidence of poverty below 5 per cent by 2016. In addition, the CBSL has 
designed a special programme to conduct a series of training programmes to facilitate bankers 
and the entrepreneurs to meet the emerging challenges of SMEs and the middle level business 
community in the country.
Chart 19.6
Forward and Actual Market Prices of Paddy (2004-2010)
12 A.S. de Alwis (2009), Page 65.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
Year
Annual Average Price Rs.
Average Forward Mkt Price Average Market Price
PDFPAGE214
203
Special Attention to Special Needs – Central Bank Focuses on Regional Development
References
Alliance for Financial Inclusion. First Annual Global Forum. Nairobi, Kenya, 2009.
Central Bank of Sri Lanka. 40th Anniversary Commemorative V olume. Colombo: Central Bank of Sri Lanka, 1990.
---. Functions and Working. Colombo: Central Bank of Sri Lanka, 1986.
de Alwis, A.S. “A Regional Analysis of Credit Needs and the Unmet Demand for Microfinance.” Central Bank of Sri 
Lanka Staff Studies 39.1&2 (2009): 37-67.
de Alwis, A.S., and B.M.R Basnayake. “Credit Guarantee Schemes in Sri Lanka--Way Forward.” Journal for SME 
Development 14 (2009): 51-82.
Department of National Planning. Mahinda Chinthana Vision for a New Sri Lanka. Colombo: Ministry of Finance 
Planning, 2006.
Hemachandra, W.M. Financial Deepeing and Its Implications for the Sri Lankan Economy. Colombo: Central Bank of 
Sri Lanka, 2005.
Wijesinghe, D.S. Sanvardana 2.2 (2009).
Wijewardena, W.A. Sanvardana 2.2 (2009).
PDFPAGE215
204
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
PDFPAGE216
205
Introduction
A new era of peace and prosperity has dawned on Sri Lanka since mid 2009. The Government 
has initiated a series of actions to fast track the development in the North and the East (N&E) 
and to support reconciliation, national unity and shared growth among all communities. Although 
N&E together account for 29 per cent of the country’s land area and 14.5 per cent of the total 
population, during 2006 – 2009 period, their contribution to GDP by industrial origin has been 
significantly low at 8.4 per cent due to adverse impacts of long years of terrorism on econ omic 
development, poverty levels and social indicators. 
Historical Backdrop: Early Development Plans
Since independence, the successive governments have attempted to achieve equitable growth 
and distribution of wealth in N&E through development of infrastructure. Way back in 1952, the 
Government prepared a Multi-Purpose Development Plan, of which the conversion of the Elephant 
Pass Lagoon into a fresh water reservoir and development of Trincomalee and Kankesanthurai 
harbours were two key projects. The Lagoon project was justified on account of the exp ansion of 
a large extent of cultivable land in the Jaffna Peninsula; the increase of the fresh water table in 
and around the lagoon; benefits from the construction of a 800 ft roadway connectin g the Eastern 
end of the lagoon; the water storage capacity of 72,000 acre ft and irrigation for cultivable land. 
Renaissance of the North and the East
Dr. (Mrs.) R. Jayamaha
Former Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka
20
PDFPAGE217
206
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
The Trincomalee port was to be expanded as a commercial harbour and serve both the N&E,  
while the Cod Bay fisheries harbour was to be developed to facilitate the fisheries industry. The 
Valachchenai fisheries harbour, which was commissioned in 1981 stopped its operations in 1991 
due to terrorist activities, while the Achchuveli industrial area operations were also abandoned 
due to similar reasons.
Nearly three decades of conflict has resulted in the destruction of infrastructure, 
under-utilisation of productive capacity and severe human suffering, thereby hindering the 
implementation of numerous development plans. In-between and during short spells of temporary 
periods of “peace”, civilians in N&E have engaged in livelihood activities. 
Table 20.1
Provincial GDP by Industrial Origin at Current Prices (2006-2010)
Year/Province Eastern Northern
GDP (Rs Mn)
 2006 143,523 81,978
 2007 185,474 104,224
 2008 246,436 139,001
 2009 (a) 279,363 155,828
 2010 (b) 331,603 191,559
GDP share (%)
 2006 4.9 2.8
 2007 5.2 2.9
 2008 5.6 3.2
 2009 (a) 5.8 3.2
 2010 (b) 5.9 3.4
GDP by Sector (Rs Mn)
 2006 Agriculture 25,542 16,453
    Industry 49,753 5,232
    Services 68,228 60,292
    GDP 143,523 81,978
 2010 Agriculture 74,038 30,622
    Industry 97,202 27,151
    Services 160,364 133,786
    GDP 331,603 191,559
(a) Revised             Source: Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report 2011
(b) Provisional
PDFPAGE218
207
Renaissance of the North and the East
As indicated in Table 20.1, GDP by sector was reflective of the under-utilisation of land 
areas of 15.2 per cent (East) and 13.8 per cent (North) for agriculture or productive activities. 
GDP in the Northern Province (NP) has been the lowest for a long period and remained around 
2.8 – 3.4 per cent during 2006-2010 period, while GDP of the Eastern Province (EP) has been at a 
much higher range than that of the NP, perhaps due to early liberation of EP and its ability to use 
land for mass scale production of paddy, maize and fisheries. 
The liberation of EP in 2007 and NP in 2009 has provided an unprecedented  opportunity 
to revive economic activities and restore normalcy in these two provinces. During 2009-2010, 
NP and EP accounted for a provincial GDP share (average) of 3.3 per cent and 5 .8 per cent, 
respectively, accompanied by per capita GDP of 23 per cent (NP) and 19 per cent (EP). 
Negenahira Navodaya (Eastern Reawakening) Programme
The Negenahira Navodaya Programme (NNP), launched in 2007, incorporated some of the 
core elements of the Mahinda Chinthana. Particular attention was paid on the restoration of 
law and order, civil administration, equitable resource allocation among all communities, 
speedy implementation of the de-mining program, re-commencement of livelihood operations, 
reconstruction of damaged social and economic infrastructure and the re-establishment of 
industrial development with private sector participation.
The Government has invested approximately Rs. 75 billion in various sector developments 
during 2007 – 2009 and a further Rs. 121 billion during 2010/201 1 for the reconstruction of 
fisheries harbours, road networks, bridges and canals in EP. The increase of 4.1 p er cent in paddy 
and 10 per cent in fish production and an increase of 17,655 metric tons of maize an d fruits by 26 
metric tons in 2007/8 witness the agriculture resurgence in EP and its growth potential. In 2009, 
paddy production in EP has doubled at 916,000 MT, indicating EP’s vast potential for productivity 
enhancement. Similarly, post-tsunami infrastructure and housing reconstruction led to a sharp 
increase in industrial sector, while providing electricity to a large number of households. More 
than 3,000 km of roads and 30 bridges have been constructed linking EP with the other regions. 
The severe floods in January 2011 have damaged some parts of the road network and bridges, 
resulting in significant losses to cultivation, while requiring reconstruction and restoration within 
a short time span.
During 2007 - June 2011, part of the livelihood operations have been financed by the 
widely spread banking outlets in EP, which commenced operations immediately after liberation of 
the province. As shown in Table 20.2 below, the total number of operating banking outlets in EP 
rose to 211 at the end of June 2011, which included new banking outlets as well as the re-opened 
old branches and extension offices.
PDFPAGE219
208
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
Table 20.2
Bank Branch Expansion in the Eastern Province
Before 2007  During 31/5/2007 – 30/6/2011
Branches opened 84 49
Extension Offices opened 34 44
 Total 118 93 211
Several hotels and tourist resorts are planned to be constructed in Trincomalee, Nilaweli, 
Arugambay and Pasikudda and other localities. Transportation, travel agencies and tourism 
information centres are being built to provide ancillary services.
The jointly-funded Government of Sri Lanka, the Netherlands and ADB’s North-East 
Coastal Community Development Project (NECCDP) has spent US dollars 28.4 million to 
develop coastal areas in the East. In 130 Grama Niladhari divisions, projects on construction of 
minor roads, community buildings, pre-schools, drinking water wells, drainage systems, fisheries 
harbours, livelihood-related infrastructure facilities, skills training and micro credit facilities have 
been completed. Under the recently agreed World Bank US dollars 57.4 million facility for small 
enterprises, 8 financial institutions have agreed to support the Government’s effort to improv e 
access to finance for Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) affected by the global crisis. SMEs 
in the N&E would also benefit from this facility. It is also planned to set up a saltern, covering   
1,800 acres and that would provide approximately 2,300 direct and indirect employment 
opportunities. 
It is notable that women are in the forefront of milk production and women’s organisations 
have funded a milk chilling centre valued at Rs. 6.8 million. Women are also involved in th e 
preparation of rice-based products, which has raised the average income of a woman to around 
Rs. 350 – 400 per day. The reconstruction of the Valachchenai, the Cod Bay Fishery harbour 
in Trincomalee and the construction of Oluvil harbour are expected to bring in multifaceted 
benefits to approximately 12,255 people. According to ADB estimates, agriculture, fisheries, 
SME and cottage industries would create about 68 per cent of total employment in the East. 
The infrastructure, especially the road network has been completed and movement of goods and 
services has significantly improved during the latter part of 2009 and in 2010.  Accor ding to the 
Ministry of Economic Development, a total sum of Rs. 495 billion has been set aside for the 
reconstruction activities in the N&E and more than 95 per cent of the planned reconstruction 
activities have been completed.
The Central Bank of Sri Lanka (CBSL) designed a special refinance scheme under the 
Reawakening of the East to promote small industries, agriculture and manufacturing activities in 
the province under which a maximum loan amount of Rs. 250,000 was granted at 9 per  cent per 
Source: Bank Supervision Department, Central Bank of Sri Lanka
PDFPAGE220
209
Renaissance of the North and the East
annum with a repayment period of 5 years inclusive of a grace period. Due to improvement in 
access to finance, EP is expected to increase its paddy production by 0.5 million metric tons and  
the country’s maize requirement by 25 per cent with potential for exports. 
The Uthuru Wasanthaya Development Programme – UWDP 
(Vadakkil Vasantham) 
NP is one of the biggest provinces in terms of land mass, comprising Jaffna, Kilinochchi, Mannar, 
Mullaitivu and Vavuniya districts. In the 1980s, NP played an important role in its con tribution 
to GDP in the areas of agriculture, livestock and fisheries. The destruction of growth momentu m 
by terrorists adversely affected prosperity of NP, contributing GDP at low 2.9 per cen t in 2007, a 
significantly lower contribution than its potential.
180 Day Accelerated Development Plan
In May 2009, the Presidential Task Force appointed for Resettlement, Development and Security 
was assigned to implement the 180 day accelerated development plan in NP. The UWDP aimed 
at promoting: nation building; living in harmony; grassroot level administrative involvement 
and organisation; financial inclusion and banking; equitable growth; and investments by Sri 
Lankan expatriates. A sum of Rs. 295 billion has been allocated for the planned investment an d 
development program for the 2010 – 2012 period. 
The immediate tasks of the 180 day plan were to: continue with the provision of humanitarian  
assistance to the internally displaced persons (IDPs); reconstruct damaged infrastructure; and 
support livelihood activities of those already settled as well as the newly resettled. At the end 
of December 2010, approximately 272,000 IDPs have been resettled on their own lands o r 
government lands after the clearance of land mines. 
Special projects, such as the reconstruction of the A-9 highway and main roads, Northern railway 
line, Mannar bridge (at a cost of Rs. 2 billion), Kokavil transmission tower (completed), Jaf fna 
water supply scheme (at a cost of Rs. 12 billion) and Kankesanthurai port development are in 
progress. The BOI has approved several private sector led projects in NP, covering manufacturing 
(textile, garments, furniture and concrete tiles) and agriculture to promote exports. 
The Government in partnership with India, is expected to commence the development of the 
Achchuveli industrial park project covering 65 acres, while infrastructure facilities will be 
developed by the Industrial Development Board and BOI. This project will revive and pool 
approximately 745 SME industrialists who were active before 1983 and assist them to start 
up or develop light industries in the area. At the completion of the project, about 4,000 direct 
employment opportunities would be created.
PDFPAGE221
210
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
The Banking Plan under UWDP 
A two-phased banking plan, consisting of a 180-day plan (July-December 2009) an d the short to 
medium term (2010-2012) post-resettlement plan was prepared in June 2009. The primary  focus 
of the 180-day plan was to provide banking services to the civilians (numbering appr ox. 280,000) 
housed in six welfare villages in the Manik Farm area. Eight commercial banks established 
temporary banking outlets and served all zones in the welfare camps through mobile banking. 
The banks opened new accounts and revived old accounts; collected deposits; facilitated inflow 
of remittances; provided safe custody facilities for jewellery and valuables; opened Trustee and 
Foster Family Accounts and serviced the university students and public officials who were living 
in the camps. During July to December 2009, banks collected a total of Rs. 2.1 billion fr om 
civilians who resided in welfare centers. 
The 2010–2012 Banking Plan (phase II) advocated the identification of viable and bankable 
projects; provision of finance at affordable rates; promotion of public/private partnerships; 
diversification of banking services; revival of the Co-operative Movement, SANASA and 
Samurdhi Societies; and the engagement in capacity building and youth training.
Catalytic Role played by the CBSL
The CBSL has been directly or indirectly involved in the development of N&E through its 
development finance and refinance schemes, which date back to the 1980s. CBSL has made 
available lending to the N&E under all its refinance schemes, although people were unable to 
derive benefits due to terrorism that prevailed over a period of nearly three decades. Accord ing to 
IDPs, their savings have been collected by the 11 Elam banks operated illegally by the LTTE. The 
civilians claimed that they lost all such savings when they were forcibly used as human shield 
during the last stages of the conflict.
Since the liberation of N&E, CBSL played a lead role and clearly demonstrated its 
commitment through effective contribution to the resurgence of N&E. Under the 2010-2012 
Banking Plan, CBSL designed new refinance schemes using its own funds and extended existing 
schemes to cover N&E, thus assisting the already settled and newly resettled people to commence 
livelihood activities. To facilitate the process, CBSL has quickened the pace of approving 
bank branches in N&E. At the end of June 2011, 166 banking outlets (both n ew and re-opened 
bank branches and extension offices) have commenced operations in NP. Banks have taken 
the initiative to promote livelihood operations in agriculture, dairy farming, agro processing, 
fisheries, ice plants, cool rooms, Palmyra farming, palm oil, transport and trade and services. Salt 
production in Elephant Pass, agriculture products from Jaffna and fisheries products from Mannar 
and Jaffna have started to move towards the rest of the country. Due to the potential for  fast track 
development, a Jaffna-centered development was pursued during 2009 until the other distr icts 
become fully inhabitable. 
PDFPAGE222
211
Renaissance of the North and the East
‘Pibidena Uthura’ - An Exclusive Refinance Scheme for NP 
As per the 2007 special census, the population in Jaffna was around 559,619. To encourage demand 
for credit and promote livelihood activities, CBSL introduced Vadakkil Vasantham – ‘Pibidena 
Uthura’, an exclusive refinance scheme, under which loans and advances were granted at 9 per 
cent per annum to both the already settled and re-settled areas. A maximum of Rs. 200,000 per 
project was available under this scheme and banks were able to claim refinance up to Rs. 2 billion 
from CBSL. This refinance scheme aimed at providing loans to small industries, agriculture 
endeavours, light engineering and manufacturing, and micro sector projects with a repayment 
period of 5 years, inclusive of 6 months grace period subject to project requirements. At the end 
of July 2011, Rs. 1.7 billion had been claimed by commercial banks under the “Awakenin g North 
Special Loan Scheme” in NP by way of refinance (Table 20.3). It is noteworthy that banks have 
also lent their own funds based on the viability and cash flows of projects. Bank of Ceylon  and 
the People’s Bank have provided mobile and ATM services to the Kilinochchi and Mullaitivu 
districts with links to their main branches in Vavunia. 
Table 20.3
Awakening North Special Loan Scheme in the NP 
Progress as at 31st July 2011
  
Bank Refinance Claimed
No. of loans Amount (Rs.Mn.)
Bank of Ceylon 4,993 622.31
People’s Bank 5,437 775.63
Hatton National Bank 476 78.23
Sanasa Dev. Bank 2,110 111.99
Commercial Bank 867 146.28
Seylan Bank 177 28.02
Sampath Bank 88 14.25
National Development Bank 0 0.00
Union Bank of Colombo Ltd. 1 0.09
 Total 14,149 1,776.80
   
In addition, special attention was paid to provide equity and working capital to N&E under 
the island-wide SME targeted ‘Saubhagya’ Refinance Scheme introduced by CBSL in 2010 with 
a commitment up to Rs. 2 billion. Loans are available at 10 per cent per annum to new SMEs 
and 9 per cent per annum to SMEs whose properties/enterprises were damaged due to terror ism. 
In addition, approximately Rs. 2,700 million and Rs. 52.06 million have been disbur sed for 
agriculture and livestock activities under the New Comprehensive Rural Credit Scheme and Agro 
Livestock Development Loan Scheme, of which the recovery rates have been satisfactory.  
Source: Regional Development Department, CBSL
PDFPAGE223
212
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
To further facilitate and promote coordination among all stakeholders and to promote 
banking and financial services in the N&E, CBSL opened its 4th provincial office in Jaffna in 
July 2010 and its 5th provincial office in Trincomalee in November 2010.  CBSL’s NP o ffice has 
been instrumental in the inclusion of multiday boat financing for the Northern fishermen into the 
“Pibidena Uthura” refinance scheme and in expediting the commissioning of two chilling plants 
in the Province by Nestle.  
The legal validity of land collateral has been a critical issue in Mullaitivu and Kilinochchi 
districts (Vanni area). CBSL has been instrumental in solving the land tenure problem of farmers 
in this area by establishing a Guarantee Scheme for land collateral, which enables banks to lend 
against a land title certificate issued by the Divisional Secretariat or, in special circumstances, 
by the Grama Niladhari and certified by the Divisional Secretariat/ Government Agent. In case 
the collateral becomes unrealisable mainly due to title disputes, banks can reclaim the resultant 
non-performing loan component from the Guarantee Fund maintained by CBSL. This move has 
enhanced Vanni area borrowers’ access to finance not only for livelihood operations, bu t also for 
entrepreneurial activities. Credit in the Vanni area, in particular, has picked up rapidly since the 
introduction of this Fund. 
The economic resurgence in Phase II was supported by the provision of essential 
infrastructure services by the Government. The re-opening of the A-9 road in December 2009 
further facilitated transport services and marketing. The rebuilding of the infrastructure and 
financial services have created a large number of direct and indirect employment opportunities. 
The banks operating in N&E have employed nearly 1000 Tamil youth at all grades and about 
600 as ancillary service providers. Through loans and advances, the banks have generated more 
than 50,000 self-employment opportunities in the two provinces. Local and foreign tourism and 
ancillary services have helped speedy resurgence of the N&E with a large number of service-
oriented employment opportunities. The re-building of the piers and roadways to Nagadeepa, the 
Sangupiddy bridge and expansion of the  Palaly airport will promote tourism and generate further 
employment.
Challenges in N&E Renaissance and Long Term Sustainability
N&E’s shares of GDP have been 2.9 per cent and 5.5 per cent, respectively, in 2009 but such rates 
are reflective of the resurgence and further potential. The continuous inflow of remittances help s 
households to maintain higher disposable and per capita income of a typical N&E household 
above that of the national average. This has generated an increasing demand for consumer 
durables. While enabling the people to enjoy peace dividend, their savings need to be diverted 
towards investment and economic activities. The resurgence, however, is not without challenges. 
A few of the major, but manageable ones are set out below: 
1. Challenges for development:  The vast disparities between districts in respect of the 
distribution of population and limitation of land is a concern. Jaffna district has more 
people than the rest of the districts taken together. In EP, disparities are less conspicuous 
PDFPAGE224
213
Renaissance of the North and the East
except between Ampara and Trincomalee, but the province as a whole is highly populated. 
This disparity has created an unevenness in the distribution of productive resources such 
as land and labour. The future developmental plans for N&E need to take cognizant of this 
geographical and resource disparities in different districts of the two provinces. It is also 
important to consider whether development plans should be Jaffna or Killinochchi centered 
as both centers offer diverse cultural, social and economic conditions.
2. Limited awareness of the objectives of development programs: Despite the implementation 
of NNP and UWDP and attempts by Government to enhance awareness of Peace Dividends, 
the Language Policy, Governance Structure, Economic Development, Human Rights, 
Democracy, IDP Resettlement, numerous external and internal elements attempt to create 
unrest among the people in N&E. Protecting people from misguidance and re-building their 
confidence over time would be a challenge. 
3. Present provincial council structure and devolution of power:  In order to fulfill the above 
mentioned aspirations, economic development and political reconciliation must go hand 
in hand. Two important matters have to be considered under the devolution process and in 
moving towards effective coordination between the central government and the provincial 
councils / local governments. First, is to build competence of the provincial councils/local 
governments to handle all functions attributed to them under the 13th Amendment. Second, 
is to analyse the extent to which the present system obliterates the issues of different districts 
as a result of overwhelming concentration of power in the hands of the provincial councils. 1 
These issues would emerge from time to time and may become obstacles in implementing 
development plans. Hence is the need to address them as early possible. 
4. Limited number of Tamil speaking officials has been a constraint: The Government has 
been trying to resolve this issue through recruitment of a large number of Tamil officers to the 
public sector and by teaching Tamil to government officials and other service providers. Th e 
position has vastly improved compared to the past. The private sector, especially banks, have 
managed the problem by recruiting Tamil officers from the region itself.
5. Youth unemployment:  The re-establishment of the fisheries industry in N&E has helped 
solve satisfactorily the immediate employment problem. Establishment of province specific 
industries and revival of the old wholesale trading centre in Killinochchi and agriculture and 
industrial centers (Achchuveli) in the Jaffna district need special attention and they would 
support livelihood operations as well as employment generation. Setting up of vocational 
training institutes in Kilinochchi, Mullaitivu and Vavuniya, Baticaloa and Ampara to develop 
entrepreneur capacity in these areas and promoting community-based programs would be 
important. In addition, the four apparel companies that have agreed to set up factories in 
the NP, Jaffna in particular, will help reduce unemployment problem of youth; women, in  
particular.
1 Ministry of Defence and Urban Development: D.A. Rajapakse Memorial Lecture, 24 November 2011.
PDFPAGE225
214
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
6. Revival of the SME sector:  The limited access of SMEs to land, finance and technology has 
been a deterrent, although agricultural lending coupled with farmer insurance schemes has 
helped to sort out problems of crop failure. Banks are attempting to transform agribusiness 
through a number of initiatives introduced through newer technologies to the Northern 
farmers. The Government plans to promote public/private partnerships for developmental 
work in N&E and foreign investment for mega projects, which would create job opportunities 
and facilitate production and marketing networks based on the use of technology, while the 
proposed World Bank facility for SMEs would help promote activities of SMEs in both N&E.
7. Non-performing loans (NPL)  was a problem for banks as accumulated NPLs prior to 31 
May 2009 was moderately high at 4 per cent of total loans. A bulk of NPLs has been on 
account of agriculture, pawning, manufacturing and trade. As the civilians were unable to 
repay loans due to dislocation/relocation and loss of livelihood operations, many banks o pted 
to write off part of the unrecoverable loans. The provision of new loans to defaulters was also 
an issue. Here too, banks have adopted a flexible approach in rescheduling loans in N&E. The 
land collateral Guarantee Scheme of CBSL has helped to ease the problem in a significant 
manner in the Vanni area.
8. Establishment of backward linkages and value chains:  In order to ensure long term 
stability, it is important to establish value chain linking the farmer, processer, retailer, 
wholesaler and exporter. Where possible, supply chains and value addition processes need 
to be promoted to boost renaissance in N&E. The supermarket chains have shown a keen 
interest to provide outgrower opportunities in NP and help retain value in the province linking 
farmers, producers, retailers and marketing groups.
9. Destruction due to weather vagaries:  The damage caused by the January 2011 floods has 
necessitated reconstruction of some parts of the road network and bridges. The Government 
has started reconstruction in the flood-damaged areas in EP and the provision of livelihoo d 
support to the people in the affected areas. Water retention during rainy season is also critical 
in N&E as they are heavily dependent on monsoonal rains. The provincial councils, under the 
guidance of relevant central government ministries/departments, should take the initiative to 
clean and enhance water retention and revive tank irrigation in both provinces. 
PDFPAGE226
215
The end of the three decade long conflict in mid 2009 bolstering investor confidence in the 
country in the backdrop of global recovery from the recession brought about greater stability and 
potential for growth of the economy than any time before in the post liberalisation period  in Sri 
Lanka. Recent trends in macro-economic conditions such as low inflation, low and stable interest 
rates, strong external reserves, stable exchange rate, improving fiscal outlook are solid indications 
that the economy is returning to normalcy from the instability it suffered for nearly thr ee decades 
since the early 1980s. Besides domestic factors, the growth that suffered from adverse global 
conditions in recent years began to show a fast recovery towards the fourth quarter 20 09 itself. 
This positive trend has continued since then and is evidenced through the sustained improvemen t 
in growth. 
The Economy in the Post-Independence Period
The post-independence period of Sri Lanka can be clearly distinguished into two period s, the pre-
liberalisation period, 1948 to late 1977 and the post liberalisation period, 1978 to date. The former 
period was characterised by different policy regimes.  A laissez-faire policy was in practice during 
the period 1948 to 1958. The period from 1958 to 1965 is seen as a per iod of gradual tightening 
of exchange controls and state intervention and increased public ownership.  The five year period, 
Recent Trends in the Emerging Economy 
of Sri Lanka
K.G.D.D. Dheerasinghe
Deputy Governor
21
PDFPAGE227
216 
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
1965 to 1970 saw a partial relaxation of exchange controls and trade but of course,  the state 
sector continued to expand. The period from 1970 to late 1977 was characterised by stringent 
state controls and rapid growth of state ownership.
At the time Sri Lanka gained independence from the British in 1948, there existed a 
primary export commodity producing economy heavily biased towards agriculture. Sri Lank a 
benefited largely from high commodity prices such as those of tea, rubber and coconut d ue to 
the Korean war boom in the early 1950s. The gross domestic product of the country  in 1948 
was approximately US dollars 850 million as compared to US dollars 50 billion in 2010. The 
population was 7.0 million then in the country compared to 20.0 million today. The GDP per 
capita which was US dollars 120 in 1948 was only second to Japan in Asia and compares with 
US dollars 2400 in 2010, which is many fold higher in absolute terms but falls significantly below 
that of many countries in Asia. South Korea, one of the poorest countries in Asia and Sing apore, 
a low income country 50 years ago, are today classified as high income advanced economies with 
high per capita income levels. Malaysia, Indonesia, Thailand and the Philippines, to name a f ew 
who trailed behind Sri Lanka in the 1950s, are today recognised as middle or high middle income 
countries by global standard. Sri Lanka remained a low income country until early 2010 when its 
position was upgraded to a “low middle income” country (IMF, February 2010). 
Sri Lanka remained a welfare state in the post-independence period. Hence human 
development was considered a priority in the policies that were pursued for a long period  of 
time. In terms of the Human Development Index (HDI) Sri Lanka’s ranks 102 today thank s to the 
policies of the welfare state. A sizeable proportion of government expenditure has been spent on 
health, education and other welfare oriented activities such as sanitation, nutrition and housing. 
However, in terms of per capita income level, Sri Lanka has lost its relative position to many 
other countries over the years due to slower growth of the economy. The annual aver age of real 
GDP growth for 60 years since 1948 has been only 3.2 per cent which is by no  means sufficient 
for a developing country to reach a high income status for its population. What is implied  by 
this is that though Sri Lanka’s GDP has grown more than 50 times, its population has increased  
nearly threefold thereby slowing down the growth of average income per head of th e population 
to around 20 times during the last 62 years.
The economy was expected to expand rapidly due to the surge in demand resulted from th e 
liberalised economic policies that came into force in late 1977. The year immediately following 
the introduction of open economy policies saw a GDP growth of 8.4 per cent in real terms and this 
growth tapered off gradually in the subsequent years until 1982 when growth rate reduced to 5.1 
per cent. With the escalation of terrorist activities and rapid deterioration of the security situation 
in the country, performance of the economy suffered severely for nearly three decad es until mid-
2009 when the conflict finally ended and long lasting peace and political stability returned. The 
July 1983 disturbances are seen by many as an event that had a colossally devastating impact 
on the economy. As violence escalated in the years to follow, the economy continued to suff er 
PDFPAGE228
217
Recent Trends in the Emerging Economy of Sri Lanka
at a rapid rate of intensity. In the meantime, the armed insurrection by the youth in the So uth 
also took a heavy toll on the economy towards the latter part of the 1980s when growth  in some 
years during this period fell below 2.0 per cent. The defeat of the youth revolt in 1989 was a sigh 
of relief and in 1990, the economy bounced back and registered a growth of 6 .2 per cent, the 
highest growth rate in a decade. However, successful exploitation of opportunities of a curb ed 
insurrection was dampened by the escalation of terrorist activities of the LTTE in the country and 
the economy continued to suffer due to instability and unsettled domestic conditions.
Since 1991, the economy grew only at a moderate rate of less than 5.0 per cent until 20 04 
and it must be noted that year 2001 registered a negative growth of 1.5 per cent. The economic 
growth accelerated since 2005 and for the four year period till 2008, a high rate of growth of over 
6.5 per cent was sustained. The economy suffered from adverse global conditions in 20 09 and 
growth dropped to 3.5 per cent. The economy was affected by adverse external cond itions firstly, 
by historically high oil and other import commodity prices, secondly by global financial crisis and 
thirdly by the global recession, worst ever since the Great Depression in the 1930s. Sri Lank a’s 
growth rate of 3.5 per cent in 2009, though moderate, compares extremely favour ably with 
negative growth rates of almost all advanced economies and the great majority of low income 
developing countries. A few large emerging market economies were able to weather the crisis due 
mainly to prudent domestic policies, despite sluggish global market conditions.
Current Performance and Near Term Prospects for the 
Economy
Since the 1st quarter 2009, the economy has shown a fast recovery as quarterly GDP indicates a 
rapid improvement. GDP growth during the last quarter of 2009 was appreciably higher at 6.2 per 
cent compared to 1.5, 2.1 and 4.2 per cent of the first three quarters of 200 9, respectively. In the 
1st quarter 2010, growth was even higher at 7.1 and growth rates of 2nd, 3 rd and 4th at 8.5, 8.0 
and 8.6 per cent showed an improving trend and consequently overall annual growth  of 2010 rose 
to a high of 8.0 per cent in comparison to a low of 3.5 per cent in the prev ious year. The growth 
is expected to rise further and sustain at a level over 8.0 per cent in 2011 and beyond. Thereby the 
economy would be moving into a high growth trajectory in the medium to long run.
The Sri Lankan economy had a reasonably high level of growth  since 2005 with gr owth 
rates of 6.2, 7.7, 6.8 and 6.0 per cent, respectively, for the four year  period up to 2008. This 
provides clear evidence that despite adverse domestic conditions, the country’s economy has 
performed well. The growth that suffered from the global crisis during late 2008 un til about 
end of first half of 2009 has since shown strong signs of a solid recovery. Th e increasingly high 
growth performance that is shown by the economy today is bolstered by heavy public investments 
on a number of large scale infrastructure development projects and large and growing pr ivate 
investments which are clearly evident from rising foreign inflows of capital and growing domestic 
investment. Though the revival of the economy is more evident in the post conflict period, it must 
PDFPAGE229
218 
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
be noted that the country was prepared for a high and fast tracked growth much bef ore the end of 
the internal conflict. Public investments on large infrastructure development projects commenced 
much earlier and the adverse external conditions due to global crisis during late 2008 and 2009 
prevented the economy from harnessing the full potential. However, the end of the conflict 
which plagued the country for nearly three decades, was a turning point in Sri Lanka’ s economic 
history as the stable political conditions provided an enormous impetus to growth and stability 
of the economy. Moreover, the successful implementation of the Stand By Arrangement of the 
International Monetary Fund since July 2009 has been instrumental in boosting up intern ational 
investor confidence on Sri Lanka. Today, overall business and investor confidence in Sri Lanka 
is buoyant and growing fast as evident by well performing stock market, tighter spreads o n 
Sri Lanka’s sovereign bonds traded in the international capital market and strong demand fo r 
Treasury bills and bonds in the domestic debt market, high and rising foreign remittances an d 
capital inflows. 
Unemployment and Incidence of Poverty Continue to be in 
Secular Improving Trend
Despite gloomy prospects for employment in the world due to slow and protracted recovery from 
the global recession, unemployment in Sri Lanka continued to drop from 5.8 per cen t in 2009 to 
4.9 per cent in 2010 and further to 4.3 per cent in the 1st quarter 2011 . Since 2004, there was a 
gradual decline in the unemployment from a high rate of 8.3 per cent to a moderate lev el of 5.2 
per cent in 2008. Though the unemployment rate rose to 5.8 per cent in 2009 , in the year as a 
whole, since the 2nd quarter of the year, the rate has dropped from 6.2 per cen t to 5.4 per cent in 
the 4th quarter and to an even lower level of 4.9 per cent by end 2010. With a third of the country’s 
labour force in agriculture, opening up of new land and fishing territories are pr oviding huge 
gains in the Eastern and Northern provinces which have been integrated back with the mainstream 
economy since the dawn of peace in the country in mid 2009. The manufacturing and services 
sectors are growing fast and as this trend is expected to continue in the future too, more prospects 
for employment are likely in those sectors thus bringing the current level of unemployment down 
to an even lower level as evident from the promising prospects of the near term outlook o f the 
economy.
 Poverty alleviation has been a main focus of economic policies of successive governments 
in the past. In the recent history of Sri Lanka the poverty level (poverty head cou nt ratio) was 
highest at 28.8 per cent in 1995/96 . This ratio has dropped gradually to 22 .7 per cent in 2002 and 
to 15.2 per cent in 2006/07. The latest calculation of poverty indices show that pover ty level of 
the country has further declined to 8.9 per cent in 2009/10 (DCS, May 2011) .
Decline in poverty is significant mainly in the estate and rural sectors while  in the urban 
sector the trend has been moderate. This is an indication of the success of public policies in 
leveling social welfare (CBSL, 2010). At present several poverty alleviation programmes are in 
PDFPAGE230
219
Recent Trends in the Emerging Economy of Sri Lanka
place targeting approximately 1.6 million families in the country. Further, reduction in po verty 
level is expected with gradual growth of household income and more equal distribution o f wealth 
as envisaged in the current policy framework.
Fiscal Reforms and Fiscal Consolidation  
Sri Lanka has had deficit budgets since 1948 except in only two years in the 1950s. On e 
salient feature was the increasingly expanding budget deficits during this period, particularly 
since late 1970s. In some instances, the budget deficit was well over 10.0 per cent of GDP and 
correspondingly the public debt that was raised to finance the deficit has grown over the years and 
reached a high of 105.6 per cent of GDP in 2002, but this ratio has since dro pped to a low of 81.9 
in 2010. High fiscal deficits are naturally due to low revenue generation and high public spending. 
Fiscal reforms and consolidation efforts therefore, need to focus on enhancing revenue,  curtailing 
expenditure and maintaining public debt at a sustainable level.
Budget deficit has been maintained at a level of 7.0 per cent of GDP or lower since 2005 
until 2008. However, in 2009, it expanded to 9.9 per cent and this again was a result of adverse 
conditions external to the economy responsible for low revenue performance and high public 
expenditure. Low commodity prices and sluggish demand were the reasons for low revenue f rom 
imports and inevitably this affected the main revenue source of the government. Fiscal stimulus 
was considered to be a panacea for all ills of crisis hit economies all around the world and fo r this 
norm, Sri Lanka was by no means an exception. However, the impact of the crisis on Sri Lan ka 
was relatively small and hence the expenditure commitment was at a minimum. Fiscal stimulus in 
Sri Lanka was also constrained by lack of fiscal space due to already a high fiscal deficit.
Of the 9.9 per cent budget deficit in 2009, 6.4 per cent was on account of capital 
expenditure and hence the high budget deficit would have been brought down to 3. 5 per cent if 
capital expenditure component was reduced to zero. Similarly, in the 2010 budget which show s 
a deficit of 8.0 per cent, the capital expenditure component was 6.1 per cent and in a scenar io of 
zero capital expenditure, overall budget deficit would be mere 1.9 per cent. Even though it sounds 
prudent to have a lower budget deficit compared to a high of 8.0 per cent, a fiscal scenario of zero 
capital expenditure in an emerging market economy like Sri Lanka would not be justifiable in 
view of the need to ensure a fast growth of the economy.
As most of the large infrastructure projects now in progress are nearing completion and as 
more public-private partnerships are expected in the future than before the high level of  public 
expenditure of capital nature currently being experienced is expected to gradually taper off  in the 
long run. The fiscal deficits in the near term are projected to be smaller at around 6.8 per cent in 
2011, 6.2 per cent in 2012 and to fall below 5.0 per cent in 2013 and beyond. Recommendations 
such as revenue enhancement measures are in place through simplification of the tax system, 
reduction of tax concessions, base broadening of income tax and indirect taxes and improv ement 
PDFPAGE231
220 
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
in tax administration among other things proposed by the Presidential Commission of Taxation 
have been incorporated into the budget 2011 and were implemented during the year.
Monetary Sector Developments and Further Easing of 
Monetary Policy
The global recession that resulted in sluggish demand and declining economic activity 
necessitating fiscal stimuli globally across all the countries brought about conditions conducive for 
relaxing monetary policies that were pursued at the time of the financial crisis. Average inflation 
in Sri Lanka dropped to its lowest levels during the last 25 year period enabling substantial policy 
rate reductions since 2009. The last policy rate cut was in January 2011 and currently th e policy 
rate corridor stands between a repo rate of 7.00 per cent and a reverse repo rate of  8.50 per cent. 
In line with downward policy rate adjustments, current market interest rates have fallen 
to low levels. The overnight interbank call money rate is now pitching close to the middle poin t 
of the policy rate corridor. The bench mark 91 day Treasury bill rate has fallen to  a level below 
the interbank call money rate suggesting further downward pressure on interest rates. In this 
environment, it is inevitable that other administratively determined rates such as bank lending 
rates will fall in line with market determined interest rates of Treasury bills and Treasury bonds. 
Both bank deposit rates and lending rates have fallen though not in proportion bu t interestingly 
the spreads between lending and deposit rates have contracted to some extent.  
Sri Lanka’s current interest rate structure appears to be more stable and consistent than any 
time during the post liberalisation period. With inflation remaining low, stable and predictable, 
some stability in positive real interest rates appears to be sustainable and this would contribute 
significantly to the stability of the economy at large. However, it may be noted that Sri Lanka’s 
interest rates are still too high and further lowering of interest rates would be desirable in v iew of 
integration of the Sri Lankan economy with the global economy.
Inflation at Low Single Digit Levels
Sri Lanka’s high inflation was an issue of concern for many years, particularly since the 
liberalisation of the economy in late 1977 which policy change marks the beginning of an era 
of high monetary expansion of our time. Judging by the crude measure of Colo mbo Consumers’ 
Price Index (CCPI), Sri Lanka’s inflation was on average around 11.5 per cent for the period 1978 
to 2008. This high rate of inflation has now reduced to a mid-single digit level both in terms of 
year on year basis and moving average basis. Strong growth in the domestic agriculture sector , 
particularly the expansion of domestic output due to resumption of economic activities in the 
North and East and stable prices of key food imports, have assisted in maintaining the headline 
inflation at benign levels. Inflation is expected to remain subdued at this level for the near term.  
From the demand front money supply is required to be maintained at levels stipulated in the 
PDFPAGE232
221
Recent Trends in the Emerging Economy of Sri Lanka
monetary programme of the Central Bank in order to anchor inflation at desired levels. Credit to 
the private sector, which contracted on a year on year basis since April 2009 due to the slo wdown 
in economic activity, showed a positive growth since March 2010 and this trend is expected to 
continue in the ensuing period given the excess capacity of the economy and enhanced pro spects 
for expansion of economic activity. The lending to deposit ratios of banks on averag e are far 
too low suggesting that the potential for lending remains high. In view of arresting the demand 
pressure from monetary expansion, Central Bank of Sri Lanka (CBSL) took a precautionar y 
measure by raising the Statutory Reserve Ratio (SRR) by one percentage point from 7.0 to 8.0 per 
cent effective from 29 April 2011.
Credit growth (year on year) that peaked at 34.4 in July 2011 has now shown sig ns of 
deceleration and is expected to normalise towards the end of 2011 to a sustainable level in the near 
term. Any realistic estimation of credit needs is hindered by non availability of data on potential 
demand for credit relating to the private sector activities in the North and East and excess capacity 
that exists in the economy as a whole. Benign asset prices, low and declining inflation, robust and 
resilient banking system with low NPL ratios and comfortable levels of capital adequacy of banks 
suggest that the economy has further capacity for expansion.
External Conditions
Sri Lanka, with its increasing openness, is vulnerable to global conditions and this was evident 
from the poor external sector performance during the recent global crisis. Both exports and imports 
dropped to significantly low levels in 2009 compared to those of the previous year. Ho wever, the 
drop in imports was much greater than that of exports and hence the trade balance showed an  
improvement and the current account deficit which rose to a high of 9.5 per cent of GDP  in 2008 
dropped to a low of 0.5 per cent of GDP in 2009. However, with the gradual rise in import prices 
more than in proportion to those of exports as reflected in the terms of trade effect, th e current 
account deficit rose to a higher level of 2.9, nonetheless will remain within a manageable level 
of around 3.5 per cent in the near term. Sri Lanka’s balance of payments was generally in surplus 
in the last few years but in 2008, due to heavy outflows of capital, the overall balance tur ned 
into negative. However, with high capital inflows and improved current account performance, 
the balance of payments in 2009 showed a significant improvement. The external imbalance of 
the country has now improved significantly and the risk of capital outflows will further redu ce 
as inflows of short term capital is capped at 10.0 per cent of the amount of Treasury bills and 
Treasury bonds outstanding. The external sector sustainability appears to be greater now than  any 
time before with the country’s official foreign reserves gradually reaching all time high at US 
dollars 8.0 billion, sufficient to cover nearly 5.8 months of the country’s impor ts.
Measures were deemed necessary to make adjustments to face challenges emanating 
from growing external reserves. The cost of managing the high level of excess rupee liqu idity 
in the domestic market was an issue of concern to CBSL. The excess rupee liquidity may also 
PDFPAGE233
222 
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
be observed as part of the transition process that the economy is undergoing at present. With 
the growth of private sector credit and import financing that is observed at present, the pr essure 
caused by excess rupee liquidity in the domestic market resulting from the accumulation of 
foreign currency reserve would gradually ease. Rapid growth of external reserves also calls 
for measures to further liberalise capital controls relating to outflows and such measures would 
also among other things contribute to improved investor confidence and further stability o f the 
economy. Another development would be the stability in the exchange rate which was often 
subject to high fluctuations in the past necessitating intervention by the central bank on a frequ ent 
basis. With greater exchange rate stability, CBSL operations in the domestic foreign exchange 
market has become an integral part of reserve and liquidity management strategy rather than 
a matter of intervention in the market. In the meantime the stability of the exchange rate has 
posed new challenges to forex dealers in the market as they are forced to operate with narrow  
spreads and reduced forward premia sufficient only to compensate their funding cost. The low 
domestic inflation has impacted favourably on the real effective exchange rate (REER) which is 
expected to improve and remain in alignment with currency movements in the market, and ensure 
competitiveness of the economy. 
Conclusions
Sri Lanka’s macroeconomic fundamentals today are much stronger than they were ever before. At 
no stage in the post liberalisation period were macro indicators, on the whole, as sound as what 
they are at present.
The economic growth is moving towards a high trajectory bolstered by steadily improving 
private investment and high capital expenditure of the government, particularly on mega 
infrastructure development programmes, most of which were commenced prior to the end of th e 
conflict.  The favourable environment that resulted from the end of the conflict with unprecedented 
political stability and security situation in the country set the stage for the economy to take off on 
a rapid growth path.  The unemployment and poverty levels have dropped to a histo ric minimum 
manifesting a favourable distributional outcome while ensuring fast tracked growth.
Fiscal sector performance shows improvement since 2010 with a more promising outcome 
in the near term after slipping into a high deficit in 2009. Simplification and base broadening  
of the current tax system and improved revenue performance are vital to fiscal consolidation. 
Improved debt sustainability is inevitable as indicated by improving debt to GDP ratio and prudent 
management of public debt where minimisation of the cost of debt and increased tenure of debt 
maturity while promoting the debt market development are priorities in the policy framework for  
the medium to long run. 
Inflation has dropped to mid-single digit levels from substantially high levels in 2008 and 
2009 and the near term outlook appears to be favourable with low and stable domestic commodity 
prices even though some upward pressure may come about from likely higher cost of impo rt 
PDFPAGE234
223
Recent Trends in the Emerging Economy of Sri Lanka
commodities and oil prices. Low and stable inflation has provided the comfort for a significant 
easing of monetary policy and interest rates have moved downward sharply in recent months. 
The lending rates have also fallen providing an  environment conducive to support th e growing 
demand for credit by the private sector. No demand pressure on inflation from credit gr owth has 
been observed and CBSL has adjusted SRR upward as a precautionary measure. 
The external sector that suffered from the recent global crisis has improved significantly 
since late 2009 and the overall balance of payments remains comfortably in surplus. The gro wth 
in foreign inflows has been phenomenal and the country’s external reserves have risen to a historic 
high. The external sector imbalance that remained earlier has now reduced sharply and the risk 
associated with short term capital inflows would no longer be significant.
The integration of the Northern and Eastern provinces with the main stream economic 
activity has added additional resources causing the country’s production possibility frontier  to 
expand significantly. Sri Lanka’s economy was not performing to its potential for nearly th ree 
decades and the favourable macro-economic environment that emerged since the cessation of the 
conflict supported by strong fundamentals has enabled faster growth with sustained stability in 
the economy in the medium to long term.  
References
Athukorala, Premachandra, and Sisira Jayasuriya. Macroeconomic Policies, Crises, and Growth in Sri Lanka, 1969−90. 
Washington, D.C.: The World Bank, 1994.
Central Bank of Sri Lanka. Annual Report, Various Issues.
Department of Census and Statistics. Poverty Indicators: Household Income and Expenditure Survey 2009/10. V ol. I (2). 
Colombo: Department of Census and Statistics, 2011.
Dheerasinghe, K.G.D.D. “The Impact of Liberalised Trade Policy on Export Growth in Sri Lanka.” Sri Lanka Economic 
Journal 5.1 (1990).
---. “Macro-Economic Consequences of Financial Globalisation for Developing Countries: Policy Challenges and 
Options for Sri Lanka.” Economy in Transition. Ed. Ajitha Tennakoon. Colombo: Vijitha Yapa Publications, 2009. 
---. “Sri Lanka: An Emerging Economy on Strong Fundamentals.” Gear Up ... Sri Lanka Next Financial Hub. Colombo: 
Association of Professional Bankers, Sri Lanka, 2010.
Government of Ceylon. Economic and Social Development of Ceylon: A Survey 1926-1954. Colombo: Government of 
Ceylon, 1955.
---. Five Year Plan 1972-1976. Colombo: Ministry of Planning and Economic Affairs, 1972.
---. Six Year Investment Programme 1954/55-1960/61. Colombo: The Planning Secretariat, 1954.
---. Ten Year Plan 1959-1968. Colombo: The Planning Council, 1959.
Indraratna, A.D.V .de S. The Economy of Ceylon. Colombo: M.D.Gunasena & Co. Ltd, 1966.
Institute of Policy Studies. The State of the Economy 2009: Prespectives on the Impact of the Global Recession. Colombo: 
Institute of Policy Studies, 2009.
International Monetary Fund. Press Release: Executive Board Concludes 2008 Article Iv Consultation with Sri Lanka, 
2008.
---. Public Information Notice No. 10/16. 2010.
---. Sri Lanka - Letter of Intent and Technical Momorandum of Understanding, 2010.
---. “Sri Lanka: First Review under the Stand By Arrangement - Staff Report; Press Release on the Executive Board 
Discussion; and Statement by the Executive Director for Sri Lanka.” 2009.
Ministry of Finance and Planning. Budget Speech. Colombo: Government of Sri Lanka, Various Years.
PDFPAGE235
224 
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
 
PDFPAGE236
225
Recent Trends in the Emerging Economy of Sri Lanka
PDFPAGE237
226 
60th Anniversary Commemorative Volume of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka: 1950 - 2010
PDFPAGE238

PDFPAGE239
End Paper 1
To the Case